J108347 


MARTIN HEIDEGGER 


AIT IN 


990108347 


BEING AND TIME 


Translated by 


John Macquarrie & Edward Robinson 


tt 


r, 

å, 

R 

? 

& 

v 

4 

m N 
6 
a 


) y 
e: 
$ 
e b o 
4 
we ô 
a” 
i. 


P 


-D 
z 


BASIL BLACKWELL 


© in this translation 
Basil Blackwell, 1962 


First English edition, 1962 
Reprinted, 1967, 1973, 1978, 1980, 1983, 1985 


Basıl Blackwell Publisher Ltd 
108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK 


0 631 10190 X (cased) 
0 631 19770 2 (paper) 


Translated from the German 
Sein und Zeit (seventh edition) 
by permission of 
Max Niemeyer Verlag, Tübingen 


Printed in Great Britain at 
The Camelot Press Ltd, Southampton 


CONTENTS 


[Page references marked ‘H’ i ‘cate the pag: ai: af the later German editions, as shown in the 
ouler marg:: text] 

Translators’ Preface 13 
Author’s Preface to the Seventh German Ei::ıun 17 
Int ution 

Exposition of the Question -i the Meaning of Being H. 2 21 
I. THe Necessrry, STRUCTURE, AND PRIORITY OF THE 
QUESTION OF BEING H. 2 2i 
1. The necessity for explicitly restating the question of 
Being H.2 21 
2, The formal structure of the question of Being H. 5 24 
3, The ontological priority of the question of Being H. 8 28 
4. The ontical priority of the question of Being H. Il 32 
II. THE Tworotp Task IN WORKING OUT THE QUESTION 
oF BEING. METHOD AND DESIGN OF OUR INVESTIGATION H.15 36 
5. The ontological analytic of Dasein as laying bare 
the horizon for an Interpretation of the meaning of: 
Being in general H.15 36 
6. The task of Destroying the history of ontology H.tg 4I 
7. The phenomenological method of investigation H.17 49 
A. The concept of phenomenon H.27 51 
B. The concept of the logos H. 32 55 
c. The preliminary conception of phenomenology H. 34 58 
8. Design of the treatise H.39 63 


Part One 


The Interpretation of Dasein in Terms of Temporality, and the 
Explication of Time as the Transcendental Horizon for the 
Question of Being | 


DIVISION ONE: PREPARATORY FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS OF 
DASEIN 


I, ExPposıTıan OF THE TASK OF A PREPARATORY ANALYSIS ` 
„= DASEIN H. 41 67 
g. The theme of the analytic of Dasein H.4t 67 


Being and Time 


10. How the analytic of Dasein is to be distinguished 


oe 


from anthropology, psychology, and biology 
The existential analytic and the Interpretation of 
primitive Dasein. The difficulties of achieving a 
‘natural conception of the world’ 


II. BEING-IN-THE-WORLD IN GENERAL AS THE BASIC STATE 


II. 


IV. 


13. 


OF DASEIN 
12. 


A preliminary sketch of Being-in-the-world, in 
terms of an orientation towards Being-in as such 
A founded mode in which Being-in is exemplified. 
Knowing the world 


THE WORLDHOOD OF THE WORLD 


I 4. 


15. 


16, 


17. 
18. 


19. 
20. 


QI. 


22. 


23. 
24. 


The idea of the worldhood of the world in general 
A. Analysis of environmentality and worldhood in general 
The Being of the entities encountered in the en- 
vironment 

How the worldly character of the environment 
announces itself in entities within-the-world 
Reference and signs 

Involvement and significance: the worldhood of 
the world 

B. A contrast between our analysis of worldhood and 
Descartes’ Interpretation of the world 

The definition of the ‘world’ as res extensa 
Foundations of the ontological definition of the 
‘world’ 

Hermeneutical discussion of the Cartesian ontology 
of the ‘world’ 


©. Thearoundness of the environment, and Dasein’s spatiality 


Thespatiality of the ready-to-hand within-the-world 
The spatiality of Being-in-the-world 
Space, and Dasein’s spatiality 


BEING-IN-THE-WORLD AS BEING-WITH AND BEING- 
ONE’S-SELF. THE “THEY’ 


25. 


26. 


27. 


An approach to the existential question of the 
“who” of Dasein 

The Dasein-with of Others, and everyday Being- 
with 

Everyday Being-one’s-Self and the “they” 


= 


mm mh 


45 


IOI 
102 


104 
IIO 


. 113 


. 114 


. 117 
„126 


71 


76 


78 
78 
86 
gI 


gt 
95 


95 


102 
107 


114 


122 
123 


125 


128 
134 
135 
138 


145 
149 


150 


153 
163 


Contents 


V. BEING-IN AS SUCH 


VI. 


28. 


The task of a thematic analysis of Being-in 


A. The existential Constitution of the “there” 


20. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33- 
34- 


Being-there as state-of-mind 

Fear as a mode of state-of-mind 

Being-there as understanding 

Understanding and interpretation 

Assertion as a derivative mode of interpretation 
Being-there and discourse. Language 

B. The everyday Being of the “there”, and the falling 
of Dasein 


. Idle talk 

. Curiosity 

. Ambiguity 

. Falling and thrownness 


T? 


CARE AS THE BEING OF DASEIN 


39: 


40. 


41. 
42. 


43- 


44. 


The question of the primordial totality 
Dasein’s structura) whole 

The basic state-of-mind of anxiety as a dististe- 
tive way in which Pasein is disclosed 

Dascin’s Being as care 


Confirmation of the existential Interpretation of 


Dasein as care in terms of Dasein’s pre-cn:c- 

logical way of interpreting itself 

Dasein, worldhood, and Reality 

(a) Reality as a problem of Being, and whether 
the ‘external world’ can be proved 

(6) Reality as an ontological problem 

(c) Reality and care 

Dasein, disclosedness, and truth 

(a) The traditional conception of truth, and its 
ontological foundations 

(6) The primordial phenomenon of truth and 
the derivative character of the traditional 
conception of truth 

(c) The kind of Being which truth possesses, 
and the presupposition of truth 


cht tee ee 


oe om 


. 200 
. 202 
. 209 


. 21] 
. 212 


. 214 


. 219 


. 226 


228 
235 


241 
244 


246 


Being and Time 


Bi VISION TWO : DASEIN AND TEMPORALITY 


45. 


I. DASEIN’S Pi :::.;::° 


The outcome of the preparatory fundamental 
analysis of Dasein, and the task of a primordial 
existentiai ; :terpretation of this ert 


© oF BEING-A-WHOLE. ano BEING- 


TOWARDS-Ni:7. 


46, 


47- 


48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 


53- 


The seeming -spossibility of getting Dasein’s 
Being-a-wh.i: into our grasp ontologically and 
determinin., ;:s en 

The possib::::v of experiencing the death of 
Others, me the possibility of getting a whole 
Dasein into cur grasp 

That which is stil] outstanding; the end; totality 
How the existential analysis of death is distin- 
guished frorn other possible Interpretations of 
this phenomenon 

Preliminary sketch of the existential-ontological 
structure of death 

Being-towards-death and the everydayness of 
Dasein 

Everyday Being-towards-the-end, and the full 
existential conception of death 

Existential projection of an authentic Being-to- 
wards-death . 


IJ. Dasern’s ATTESTATION OF AN AUTHENTIC POTENTIAL- 
ITY-FOR-BEING, AND RESOLUTENESS 


54- 
55: 
56. 
57: 
58. 
59- 


6o. 


The problem of how an authentic existentiell 
possibility is attested 

The nee foundations of con- 
science 

The character of conscience as a call 
Conscience as the call of care 

Understanding the appeal, and guilt 

The existential Interpretation of the conscience, 
and the way conscience is ordinarily interpreted 
The existential structure of the authentic poten- 
tiality-for-Being which is attested in the con- 
science 


moeg 


. 231 


. 295 


274 


279 


279 


281 
285 
290 
293 
296 
299 


304 


312 


312 
315 
317 
319 
325 


335 


341 


9108347 


Contents 


III. Dasem’s AUTHENTIC POTENTIALITY-FOR-BEING-A- 
WHOLE, AND TEMPORALITY As THE ONTOLOGICAL 
MEANING OF ÜARE 


IV. 


61. 


62. 


A preliminary sketch of the methodological step 
from the definition of Dasein’s authentic Being- 
a-whole to the laying-bare of temporality as a 
phenomenon 

Anticipatory resoluteness as the way in which 
Dasein’s _potentiality-for-Being-a-whole has 
existentiell authenticity 


63. The hermeneutical situation at. which we have 


64. 


arrived for Interpreting the meaning of the 
Being of care; and the methodological character 
of the existential analytic in general 

Care and selfhood 


65. Temporality as the ontological meaning of care 


66. 


Dasein’s temporality and the tasks arising there- 
from of repeating the existential analysis in a 
more primordial manner 


TEMPORALITY AND EVERYDAYNESS 


67. 


68. 


69. 


70. 


71. 


The basic content of Dasein’s existential con- 

stitution, and a preliminary sketch of the 

temporal Interpretation of it 

The temporality of disclosedness in general 

(a) The temporality of understanding 

(b) The temporality of state-of-mind 

(c) The temporality of falling 

(d) The temporality of discourse 

The temporality of Being-in-the-world and the 

problem of the transcendence of the world 

(a) The temporality of circumspective concern 

(b) The temporal meaning of the way in which 
circumspective concern becomes modified 
into the theoretical discovery of the present- 
at-hand within-the-world 


(c) The temporal problem of the transcendence. 


of the world 
The temporality of the spatiality that is charac- 
teristic of Dasein 
The temporal meaning of Dasein’s everydayness 


H. 301 


349 


349 


352 


421 


32 


Bang and Time 


V. TEMPORALITY AND HISTORICALITY 


72. 
73: 
74. 
75: 
76. 


77- 


Existential-ontological exposition of the prob- 
lem of history 

The ordinary understanding of history, and 
Dasein’s historizing 

The basic constitution of historicality | 

Dasein’s historicality, and world-history 

The existential source of historiology in Dasein’s 
historicality 

The connection of the foregoing exposition of the 
problem of historicality with the researches of 
Wilhelm Dilthey and the ideas of Count Yorck 


VI: TEMPORALITY AND WITHIN-TIME-NESS AS THE SOURCE 
OF THE ORDINARY CONCEPTION OF TIME 


78. 


79: 
80. 


81. 


82. 


83. 


The incompleteness of the foregoing temporal 

analysis of Dasein 

Dasein’s temporality, and our concern with time 

The time with which we concern ourselves, and 

within-time-ness 

Within-time-ness and the genesis of the ordinary 

conception of time 

A comparison of the existential-ontological 

connection of temporality, Dasein, and world- 

time, with Hegel’s way of taking the relation 

between time and spirit 

(a) Hegel’s conception of time 

(6) Hegel’s Interpretation of the connection 
between time and spirit 

The existential-temporal analytic of Dasein, and 

the question of fundamental ontology as to the 

meaning of Being in general 


Author’s Notes 
Glossary of German Terms 


Index 


. 372 
. 372 
. 378 
. 382 
. 387 


» 392 


«397 


- 404 


. 404 
. 406 


. 411 


. 420 


. 428 
. 428 


« 433 


. 436 


464 


472 


480 
480 


484 


486 


489 
503 
524 


TRANSLATORS’ PREFACE 


More than thirty years have passed since Being and Time first appeared, 
and it has now become perhaps the most celebrated philosophical work 
which Germany has produced in this century. It is a very difficult book, 
even for the German reader, and highly resistant to translation, so much 
so that it has often been called ‘untranslatable’. We feel that this is an 
exaggeration. | 

Anyone who has struggled with a philosophical work in translation has 
constantly found himself asking how the author himself would have 
expressed the ideas which the translator has ascribed to him. In this respect 
the ‘ideal’ translation would perhaps be one so constructed that a reader 
with reasonable linguistic competence and a key to the translator’s cua- 
ventions should be able to retranslate the new version into the very words 
of the original. Everybody knows that this is altogether too much te 
demand; but the faithful translator must at least keep this ahead of him: 
as a desirable though impracticable goal. The simplest compromise with 
the demands of his own langugage is to present the translation and the 
original text on opposite pages; he is then quite free to cl.oose the most 
felicitous expressions he can think of, trusting that the reader who is 
shrewd enough to wonder what is really happening can look across and 
find out. Such a procedure would add enormously to the expense of a back 
as long as Being and Time, and is impracticable for other reasons, But on 
any page of Heidegger there is a great deal happening, and we have feit 
that we owe it to the reader to let him know what is going on. For the 
benefit of the man who already has a copy of the German text, we have 
indicated in our margins the pagination of the later German editicns, 
which differs only slightly from that of the earli:r ones, All citatior: 
marked with ‘H’ refer to {qt pagination. But for the reader who does :;ot 
have the German text haı::'v, we have had to use other devices. 

As long as an author is ising words in their ordinary ways, the tra::«- 
lator should not have much trouble in showing wh:.t he is trying to say. 
But Heidegger is constantly usin;. words in ways w::ich are by no means 
ordinary, and a great part of his merit lies in the freshness and penetra- 
tion which his very innova:.ons reflect. He tends t discard much of the 
traditional philosophical tv «.aolory, substituting +n elaborate vocabu- 
lary of his own. He occasio iiy us new express: ns from older roots, 
and he takes full advantage ©: $.. e se with which ne German language 
lends itself to the formai'o> of new compounds. ie also uses familiar 


14 Being and Time 


expressions in new ways. Adverbs, prepositions, pronouns, conjunctions 
are made to do service as nouns; words which have undergone a long 
history of semantical change are used afresh in their older senses; spec- 
ialized modern idioms are generalized far beyond the limits within which 
they would ordinarily be applicable. Puns are by no means uncommon 
and frequently a key-word may be used in several senses, successively or 
even simultaneously. He is especially fond of ringing the changes on 
words with a common stem or a common prefix. He tends on the whole 
to avoid personal constructions, and often uses abstract nouns (‘Dasein’, 
‘Zeitlichkeit’, ‘Sorge’, ‘In:der-Welt-sein’, and so forth) as subjects of 
stntences where a personal subject would ordinarily be found. Like 
Aristotle or Wittgenstein, he likes to talk about his words, and seldom 
makes an innovation without explaining it; but sometimes he will have 
used a word in a special sense many times before he gets round to the 
explanation; and he may often use it in the ordinary senses as well. In 
such cases the reader is surely entitled to know what word Heidegger is 
actually talking about, as well as what he says about, it; and he is also 
entitled to know when and how he actually uses it. | 

We have tried in the main to keep our vocabulary under control, 
provicing a German-English glossary for the more important expres- 
sions, and a rather full analytical index which will also serve as an English- 
German glossary. We have tried to use as few English terms as possible 
te represent the more important German ones, and we have tried not to 
to use these for other purposes than those we have specifically indicated. 
Sometimes we have had to coin new terms te correspond to Heidegger’s. 
In a number of cases there are two German terms at the author’s disposal 


which he has chosen to differentiate, even though they may be synonyms | 


in ordinary German usage; if we have found only one suitable English 
term to correspond to them, we have:sometimes adopted the device of 
capitalizing it when it represents the German word to which it is etymo- 
logically closer: thus ‘auslegen’ becomes ‘interpret’, but ‘interpretieren’ 
becomes ‘Interpret’, ‘gliedern’ becomes ‘articulate’, but ‘artikulieren’ 


becomes ‘Articulate’; ‘Ding’ becomes ‘Thing’, but ‘thing’ represents ` 
‘Sache’ and a number of other expressions. In other cases we have coined,” 
a new term. Thus while ‘tatsächlich’ becomes ‘factual’, we have intro- 
duced ‘factical’ to represent ‘faktisch’, We have often inserted Germiin ` 


expressions in square brackets or. the occasions of their first appearance 
or on that of their official definition. But we have also used bracketed 
expressions to call attention to departures from our usual conventions, or 


ha a ra = 


un 


to bring out etymological connections which might otherwise be over- ' 


Inoked. 


Being and Time 15 

In many cases bracketing is insufficient, and we have introduced foot- 
notes of our own, discussing some of the more important terms on the 
occasion of their first appearance. We have not hesitated to quote German | 
sentences at length when they have been ambiguous or obscure; while we 
have sometimes taken pains to show where the ambiguity lies, we have 
more often left this to the reader to puzzle out for himself. We have often . 
quoted passages with verbal subtleties which would otherwise be lost in 
translation. We have also called attention to a number of significant 
differences between the earlier and later editions of Heidegger’s work. - 
The entire book was reset for the seventh edition; while revisions were by 
no means extensive, they went beyond the simple changes in punctuation 
and citation which Heidegger mentions in his preface. We have chosen the 
third edition (1931) as typical of the earlier editions, and the eighth 
(1957) as typical of the later ones. In general we have preferred the read- 
ings of theeighth edition, and our marginal numbering and cross-references 
follow its pagination. Heidegger’s very valuable footnotes’ have been 
renumbered with roman numerals and placed at the end of the text 
where we trust they will be given the attention they deserve. Hoping that 
our own notes will be of immediate use to the reader, we have placed 
them at the bottoms of pages for easy reference, indicating them with 
arabic numerals. 

In general we have tried to stick to the text as closely as we can without 
sacrificing intelligibility; but we have made numerous concessions to the 
reader at the expense of making Heidegger less Heideggerian. We have, 
for instance, frequently used personal constructions where Heidegger has 
avoided them. We have also tried to be reasonably flexible in dealing with 
hyphenated expressions. Heidegger does not seem to be especially con- 
sistent in his use of quotation marks, though in certain expressions (for 
instance, the word ‘Welt’) they are very deliberately employed. Except in 
a few footnote references and some of the quotations from Hegel and 
Count Yorck in the two concluding chapters, our single quotation marks 
represent Heidegger’s double ones. But we have felt free to introduce 
double ones of our own wherever we feel that they may be helpful to 
the reader. We have followed a similar policy with regard to italicization. 
When Heidegger uses italics in the later editions (or spaced type in the 
earlier ones), we have generally used italics; but in the relatively few cases 
where we have felt that some emphasis of our own is needed, we have 
resorted to wide spacing. We have not followed Heidegger in the use of 
italics for proper names or for definite articles used demonstratively to 
introduce restrictive relative clauses. But we have followed the usual 
practice of italicizing words and phrases fret: languages other tien Taglish 


16 Being and Time 


and German, and have italicized titles uf books, regardless of Heidegger’s 
procedure. | 

We have received help from several sources. Miss Marjorie Ward has 
collated the third and eighth editions, and made an extremely careful 
study of Heidegger’s vocabulary and ours, which has saved us from 
innumerable incongistencies and many downright mistakes; there is hardly 
a page which has not profited by her assistance. We are also indebted 
to several persons who have helped us in various ways: Z. Adamczewski, 
‚Hannah Arendt, J. A. Burzle, C. A. Campbell, G. M. George, Fritz Heider, 
Edith Kern, Norbert Raymond, Eva Schaper, Martin Scheerer, John 
Wild. If any serioys errors remain, they are probably due to our failure 
to exploit the time and good nature of these friends and colleagues more 
unmercifully. We are particularly indebted to Professor R. Gregor Smith 
who brought us together in the first place, and who, perhaps more than 
anyone else, has made it possible for this translation to be presented to 
the public. We also wish to express our appreciation to our publishers 
and to Max Niemeyer Verlag, holders of the German copyright, who have 
shown extraordinary patience in putting up with the long delay in the 
preparation of our manuscript. 

We are particularly grateful to the University of Kansas for generous 
research grants over a period of three years, and to the University of 
Kansas Endowment Association for enabling us to work together in 
Scotland. 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE SEVENTH GERMAN 
EDITION 


Tuis treatise first appeared in the spring of 1927 in the Jahrbuch für 
Phänomenologie und phänomenologische Forschung edited by Edmund Husserl, 
and was published simultaneously in a special printing. 

The present reprint, which appears as the seventh edition, is unchanged 
in the text, but has been newly revised with regard to quotations and 
punctuation. The page-numbers of this reprint agree with those of the 
earlier editions except for minor deviations.! 

While the previous editions have borne the designation ‘First Half’, 

this has now been deleted. After a quarter of a century, the second half 
could no longer be added unless the first were to be presented anew. Yet 
the road it has taken remains even today a necessary one, if our Dasein is 
to be stirred by the question of Being. 
' For the elucidation of this question the reader may refer to my Einführung 
in die Metaphysik, which is appearing simultaneously with this reprinting 
under the same publishers.” This work presents the text of a course of 
lectures delivered in the summer semester of 1935. 

1 See Translators’ Preface, fis 

bin 


8 Max Niem Verlag, $ , 1953. English translation by Ralph Manheim, 
Yale University Press and Oxfi niversity Press, 1959. 


BEING AND TIME 


... ÖMAov yap ws peis pèr radra (Ti more Bovieode onpaivew ómórav dv 
bdeyynode) mals yıyvworere, tyes dt apd tod èv woneda, viv 6’ nropi- 
KAEV... 

‘For manifestly you have long been aware of what you mean when you 
use the expression ‘‘being’’. We, however, who used to think we under- 
stood it, have now become perplexed.”! 

Do we in our time have an answer to the question of what we really 
mean by the word ‘being’?! Not at all. So it is fitting that we should 
raise anew the question of the meaning? of Being. But are we nowadays even 
perplexed at our inability to understand the expression ‘Being’? Not at 
all. So first of all we must reawaken an understanding for the meaning of 
this question. Our aim in the following treatise is to work out the question 
of the meaning of Betng and to do so concretely. Our provisional aim 
is the Interpretation? of time as the possible horizon for any understanding 
whatsoever of Being.* 

But the reasons for making this our aim, the investigations which such 
a purpose requires, and the path to its achievement, call for some intro- 
ductory remarks. 


1 ‘seiend’. Heidegger translates Plato’s present participle öv by this present participle 
of the verb ‘sein’ (‘to be’). We accordingly translate ‘seiend’ here and in a number of 
later passages by the present participle ‘being’; where such a translation is inconvenient 
we shall resort to other constructions, usually subjoining the German word in brackets or 
in a footnote. The participle ‘seiend’ must be distinguished from the infinitive ‘sein’, 
which we shall usually translate either by the infinitive ‘to be’ or by the gerund ‘being’. 
It must also be distinguished from the important substantive ‘Sein’ (always capitalized}, 
which we shall translate as ‘Being’ (capitalized), and from the equally important sub- 
stantive ‘Sctendes’, which is directly derived from ‘seiend’, and which we shall usually 
iranslate as ‘entity’ or ‘entities’. (See our note 6, H. 3 below.) . 

2 ‘Sinn.’ In view of the importance of the distinction between ‘Sinn’ and ‘Bedeutung’ 
in German writers as diverse as Dilthey, Husserl, Frege and Sthlick, we shall translate 
‘Sinn’ by ‘meaning’ or ‘sense’, depending on the context, and keep ‘signification’ and 
‘signify’ for ‘Bedeutung’ and ‘bedeuten’. (The verb ‘mean’ will occasionally be used to 
translate such verbs as ‘besagen’, ‘sagen’, ‘heisen’ and ‘meinen’, but the noun ‘meaning’ 
will be reserved for ‘Sinn’.) On ‘Sinn’, see H. 151, 324; on ‘Bedeutung’, etc., see H. 87, 
and our note 47 ad loc. 

3 Heidegger uses two words which might well be translated as ‘interpretation’: ‘Aus- 
legung’ and ‘Interpretation’. Though in many cases these may be regarded as synonyms, 
their connotations are not quite the same. ‘Auslegung’ seems to be used in a broad sense 
to covet any activity in which we interpret something ‘as’ something, whereas ‘Inter- 
pretation’ seems to apply to interpretations which are more theoretical or systematic, as 
in the exegesis of a text. See especially H. 148 ff. and 199 f. We shall preserve this distinc- 
tion by writing ‘interpretation’ for ‘Auslegung’, but ‘Interpretation’ for Heidegger’s 
‘Interpretation’, following similar conventions for the verbs ‘auslegen’ and ‘interpretieren’. 

4‘. , „ als des möglichen Horizontes eines jeden Seinsverständnisses überhaupt . . .’ 
Thfoughout this work the word ‘horizon’ is used with a connotation somewhat different 
froth that to which the English-speaking reader is likely to be accustomed. We tend to 
think of a horizon as something which we may widen or extend or go beyond; Heidegger, 
however, seems to think of it rather as something which we can neither widen nor go 
beyond, but which provides the limits for certain intellectual activities performed ‘within’ it. 


INTRODUCTION 


EXPOSITION OF THE QUESTION OF 
THE MEANING OF BEING 


I 


THE NECESSITY, STRUCTURE, AND PRIORITY 
OF THE QUESTION OF BEING 


Tr. The Necessity for Explicitly Restating the Question of Being 

Tuis question has today been forgotten. Even though in our time we 
deem it progressive to give our approval to ‘metaphysics’ again, it is held 
that we have been exempted from the exertions of a newly rekindled 
yıyavronaxia mepi ris ovaias. Yet the question we are touching upon is not just 
any question. It is one which provided a stimulus for the researches of 
Plato and Aristotle, only to subside from then on as a theme for actual 
investigation.! What these two men achieved was to persist through many 
alterations and ‘retouchings’ down to the ‘logic’ of Hegel. And what 
they wrested with the utmost intellectual effort from the phenomena, 
fragmentary and incipient though it was, has long since become 
trivialized. 

Not only that. On the basis of the Greeks’ initial contributions towards 
an Interpretation of Being, a dogma has been developed which not only 
declares the question about the meaning of Being to be superfluous, but 
sanctions its complete neglect. It is said that ‘Being’ is the most universal 
and the emptiest of concepts. As such it resists every attempt at definition, 
Nor does this most universal and hence indefinable concept require any 
definition, for everyone uses it constantly and already understands what 
he means by it. In this way, that which th. ancient philosophers found 
continually disturbing as something obscure and hidden has taken on a 
clarity and self-evidence such that if anyone continues to ask about it he 
is charged with an error of method. 

At the beginning of our investigation it is not possible to give a detailed 

1‘, . . als thematische Frage wirklicher Untersuchung’. When Heidegger speaks of a question 
as ‘thematisch’, he thinks of ıt as one which is taken seriously and studied in a systematic 
manner. While we shal! often translate this adjective by its cognate, ‘thernatic’, we may 


sometimes find it convenient to choosc more flexible expressions involving the word 
‘theme’. (Heidegger gives a fuller discussion on H. 363.) 


22 Being and Time Int. I 


account of the presuppositions and prejudices which are constantly 
reimplanting and fostering the belief that an inquiry into Being is unneces- 
sary. They are rooted in ancient ontology itself, and it will not be possible 
to interpret that ontology adequately until the question of Being has been 
clarified and answered and taken as a clue—at least, if we are to have 
regard for the soil from which the basic ontological concepts developed, 
and if we are to see whether the categories have been demonstrated in a 
way that is appropriate and complete. We shall therefore carry the dis- 
cussion of these presuppositions only to the point at which the necessity 
for restating the question about the meaning of Being become plain. 
There are three such presuppositions. 

1. First, it hds been maintained that ‘Being’ is the ‘most universal’ 
concept: 76 évdors kadiou pddora návraw.i Illud quod primo cadit sub 
apprehensione est ens, cuius intellectus includitur in omnibus, quaecumque quis 
apprehendit. ‘An understanding of Being is already included in conceiving 
anything which one apprehends as an entity.’!-!! But the ‘universality’ of 
‘Being’ is not that of a class or genus. The term ‘Being’ does not define that 
realm of entities which is uppermost when these are Articulated con- 
ceptually according to genus and species: ore ro dv yévos.!!! The ‘univer- 
sality’ of Being ‘transcends’ any universality of genus. In medieval ontology 
‘Being’ is designated as a ‘transcendens’. Aristotle himself knew the unity of 
this transcendental ‘universal’ as a unity of analogy in contrast to the 
multiplicity of the highest generic concepts applicable to things. With 
this discovery, in spite of his dependence on the way in which the 
ontological question had been formulated by Plato, he put the problem 
of Being on what was, in principle, a new basis. To be sure, even Aristotle 
failed to clear away the darkness of these categorial interconnections. In 
medieval ontology this problem was widely discussed, especially in the 
Thomist and Scotist schools, without reaching clarity as to principles. 
And when Hegel at last defines ‘Being’ as the ‘indeterminate immediate’ 
and makes this definition basic for all the further categorial explications 
of his ‘logic’, he keeps looking in the same direction as ancient ontology, 


ree |. was einer am Seienden erfasst” ’. The word ‘Seiendes’, which Heidegger uses 
in his paraphrase, is one of the most important words in the book. The substantive ‘das 
Seiende’ is derived from the participle seiend’ (see note 1, p. 19), and means literally 
‘that which is’; ‘ein Seiendes’ means ‘something which is’. there is much to be said for 
translating ‘Seiendes’ by the noun ‘being’ or ‘beings’ (for it is often used in a collective 
sense). We feel, however, that it is smoother and less confusing to write ‘entity’ or ‘en- 
tities’, We are well aware that in recent British and American philosophy the term 
‘entity’ has been used more generally to apply to almost anything whatsoever, no matter 
what its ontological status. In this translation, however, it will mean simply ‘something 
which is’. An alternative translation of the Latin quotation is given by the English 
Dominican Fathers, Summa Theologica, Thomas Baker, London, 1918: ‘For that which, 
before aught else, falls under apprehension, is being, the notion of which is included in all 
things whatsoever a man apprehenda.' 


Int. I Being and Time 23 


except that he no longer pays heed to Aristotle’s problem of the unity of 
Being as over against the multiplicity of ‘categories’ applicable to 
things. So if it is said that ‘Being’ is the most universal concept, this 
cannot mean that it is the one which is clearest or that it needs no further 
iscussion. It is rather the: ~kes: of all. 

2, It has been maintat.cd secondly at the concept of ‘Being’ is 
indefinable. This is deduced from its sup-renic universality,'Y and rightly 
30, if definitio fit per genus proximum et differentiam specificam. ‘Being’ cannot 
indeed be conceived as an entity; enti nun additur aliqua natura: nor can it 
acquire such a character as to have the term “entity” applied ‘to it. 
“Being” cannot be derived from higher concepts by definition, nor can 
it be presented through lower ones. But does this imply that ‘Being’ no 
longer offers a problem? Not at all. We «an infer only that ‘Being’ cannot 
have the character of an entity. Thus we cannot apply to Being the concept 
of ‘definition’ as presented in traditionai logic, which itself has its founda- 
tions in ancient ontology and which, within certain limits, provides a 
quite justifiable way of defining “entities”. The indefinability of Being 
does not eliminate the question of its meaning; it demands that we look 
that question in the face. | 

3. Thirdly, it is held that ‘Being’ is of all concepts the one that is self- 
evident. Whenever one cognizes anything or makes an assertion, whenever 
one comports oneself towards entities, even towards oneself,! some use 
is made of ‘Being’; and this expression is held to be intelligible ‘without 
further ado’, just as everyone understands “The sky is blue’, ‘I am merry’, 
and the like. But here we have an average kind of intelligibility, which 
merely demonstrates that this is unintelligible. It makes manifest that in 
any way of comporting oneself towards entities as entities—even in any 
Being towards entities as entities—there lies a priori an enigma.? The very 
fact that we already live in an understanding of Being and that the mean- 
ing of Being is still veiled in darkness proves that it is necessary in principle 
to raise this question again. | 

Withintherangeofbasicphilosophicalconcepts—especiallywhen we come 
to the concept of ‘Being’—it is a dubious procedure to invoke self-evidence, 
even if the ‘self-evident’ (Kant’s ‘covert judgments of the common reason’)? 


1°... in jedem Verhalten zu Seiendem, in jedem Sich-zu-sichsselbst-verhalten . . . 
The verb 'verhalten’ can refer to any kind of behaviour or way of conducting oneself, 
even to the way in which one relates oneself to something else, or to the way one refrains 
or holds oneself back. We shall translate it in various ways. i 

2 ‘Sie macht offenbar, dass in jedem Verhalten und Scin zu Seiendem als Seiendem a 

iori ein Rätsel liegt.’ The phrase ‘Sein zu Seiendem’ is typical of many similar expressions 
in which the substantive ‘Sein’ is followed by the preposition ‘zu’. In such expressions 
we shall usually translate ’2u" as ‘towards’: for example, ‘Being-towards-death’, “Being 
towards Others’, ‘Being towards entities within-the-world’. 


a> | 


9° “die geheimen Urteile der gemeinen Vernunft” ’. 


24 Being and Time Int. I 
is to become the sole explicit and abiding theme for one’s analytic— 
‘the business of philosophers’. 

By considering these prejudices, however, we have made plain not only 
that the question of Being lacks an answer, but that the question itself is 
obscure and without direction. So if it is to be revived, this means that 
we must first work out an adequate way of formulating it. 


{| 2. The Formal Structure of the Question of Being 


The question of the meaning of Being must be formulated. If it is a 
fundamental question, or indeed the fundamental question, it must be 
made transparent, and in an appropriate way.! We must therefore 
explain briefly what belongs to any question whatsoever, so that from this 
standpoint the question of Being can be made visible as a very special one 
with its own distinctive character. 

Every inquiry is a seeking [Suchen]. Every seeking gets guided before- 
hand by what is sought. Inquiry is a cognizant seeking for an entity both 
with regard to the fact that it is and with regard to its Being as it is.? 
This cognizant seeking can take the form of ‘investigating’ [““Untersuchen”], 
in which one lays bare that which the question is about and ascertains its 
character. Any inquiry, as an inquiry about something, has that which ts 
asked about [sein Gefragtes]. But all inquiry about something is somehow a 
questioning of something [Anfragen bei |. .]. So in addition to what is 
asked about, an inquiry has that which is interrogated [ein Befragtes]. In 
investigative questions—that is, in questions which are specifically theo- 
retical—-what is asked about is determined and conceptualized. Further- 
more, in what is asked about there lies also that which is to be found out by 
the asking [das Erfragte]; this is what is really intended:? with this the 
inquiry reaches its goal. Inquiry itself is the behaviour of a questioner, and 
therefore of an entity, and as such has its own character of Being. When one 
makes an inquiry one may do so ‘just casually’ or one may formulate the 

1°... dann bedarf solches Fragen der angemessenen Durchsichtigkeit’. The adjective 
‘durchsichtig’ is one of Heidegger’s favourite expressions, and means simply ‘transparent’, 


‘perspicuous’, something that one can ‘see through’. We shall ordinarily translate it ‘by 
‘transparent’. See H. 146 for further discussion. 


2°... in seinem Dass- und Sosein’. 


3°... das eigentlich Intendierte . . .? The adverb ‘eigentlich’ occurs very often in this 
work. It may be used informally where one might write ‘really’ or ‘on its part’, or in a 
much stronger sense, where something like ‘genuinely’ or ‘authentically’ would be more 
appropriate. It is not always possible to tell which meaning Heidegger has in mind. In the 
contexts which seem relatively informal we shall write ‘really’; in the more technical 
passages we shall write ‘authentically’, reserving ‘genuinely’ for ‘genuin’ or ‘echt’. The 
reader must not confuse this kind of ‘authenticity’ with the kind, which belongs to an 
‘authentic text’ or an ‘authentic account’. See H. 42 for further discussion. In the present 
passage, the verb ‘intendieren’ is presumably used in the medieval sense of ‘intending’, as 
adapted and modified by Brentano and Husserl. 


Int. I Being and Time 25 
question explicitly. The latter case is peculiar in that the inquiry does not 
become transparent to itself until all these constitutive factors of the 
question have themselves become transparent. 

The question about the meaning of Being is to be formulated. We must 
therefore discuss it with an eye to these structural items. 

Inquiry, as a kind of seeking, must be guided beforehand by what is 
sought. So the meaning of Being must already be available to us in some 
way. As we have intimated, we always conduct our activities in an'under- 
standing of Being. Out of this understanding arise both the explicit ques- 
tion of the meaning of Being and the tendency that leads us towards its 
conception. We do not know what ‘Being’ means. But even if we ask, 
‘What zs “Being”? ?’, we keep within an understanding of the ‘is’, though 
we are unable to fix conceptionally what that ‘is’ signifies. We do not 
even know the horizon in terms of which that meaning is to be grasped 
and fixed. But this vague average understanding of Being is still a Fact. 

However much this understanding of Being (an understanding which is 
already available to us) may fluctuate and grow dim, and border on mere 
acquaintance with a word, its very indefiniteness is itself a positive pheno- 
menon which needs to be clarified. An investigation of the meaning of 
Being cannot be expected to give this clarification at the outset. If we are 
to obtain the clue we need for Interpreting this average understanding of 
Being, we must first develop the concept of Being. In the light of this 
concept and the ways in which it may be explicitly understood, we can 
make out what this obscured or still unillumined understanding of Being 
means, and what kinds of obscuration—or hindrance to an explicit 
iilumination—-of the meaning of Being are possible and even inevitable. 

Further, this vague average understanding of Being may be so infil- 
trated with traditional theories and opinions about Being that these 
remain hidden as sources of the way in which it is prevalently understood. 
What we seek when we inquire into Being is not something entirely 
unfamiliar, even if proximally! we cannot grasp it at all. 

In the question which we are to work out, what zs asked about is Being— 
that which determines entities as entities, that on the basis of which 


1 ‘zunächst’. This word is of very frequent occurrence in Heidegger, and he will 
discuss his use of it on H. ‚370 below. In ordinary German usage the word may mean ‘at 
first’, ‘to begin with’, or ‘in the first instance’, and we shall often translate it in such ways. 
The word is, however, cognate with the adjective ‘nah’ and its superlative ‘nächst’, 
which we shall usually translate as ‘close’ and ‘closest’ respectively; and Heidegger often 
uses ‘zunächst’ in the sense of ‘most closely’, when he is describing the most ‘natural’ and 
‘obvious’ experiences which we have at an uncritical and pre-philosophical level. We 
have ventured to translate this Heideggerian sense of ‘zunächst’ as ‘proximally’, but there 
are many border-line cases where it is not clear whether Heidegger has in ‘mind this 
special sense or one of the more general usages, and in such cases we have chosen whatever 
expression seems stylistically preferable. 


26 Being and Time Int. I 


[woraufhin] entities are already understood, however we may discuss 
them in detail. The Being of entities ‘is’ not itself an entity. If we are to 
understand the problem of Being, our first philosophical step consists in 
not plov twa Ömyeiodaı,Y iu not ‘telling a story’-—that is to say, in not 
defining entities as entities ! „racing them back in their origin to some 
other entities, as if Being had ine character of ss: ce possible entity. Hence 
Being, ag that which is asked about, must be exhibited in a way of its own, 
essentially different from the way in which entities are discovered. Accord- 
ingly, what ts to be found out by the asking—the meaning of Being—also 
demands that it be conceived in a way of its own, essentially contrasting 
with the concepts in which entities acquire their determinate signification. 
In so far as Being constitutes what is asked about, and ““Being’’ means 
the Being of entities, then entities themselves turn out to be what ts inter- 
rogated. These are, so to speak, questioned as regards their Being. But if 
the characteristics of their Being can be yielded without falsification, then 
these entities must, on their part, have become accessible as they are in 
themselves. When we come to what is to be interrogated, the question of 
Being requires that the right way of access to entities shall have been 
obtained and secured in advance. But there are many things which we 
designate as ‘being’ [“‘seiend”], and we do so in various senses. Everything 
we talk about, everything we have in view, everything towards which we 
comport ourselves in any way, is being; what we are is being, and so is 
how we are. Being lies in the fact that something is, and in its Being as it is} 
in Reality; in presence-at-hand; in subsistence; in validity; in Dasein; 
in the ‘there is’.! In which entities is the meaning of Being to be discerned ? 
From which entities is the disclosure of Being to take its departure? Is 
the starting-point optional, or does some particular entity have priority. 
when we come to work out the question of Being? Which entity shall we 
take for our example, and in what sense does it have priority? . 
If the question about Being is to be explicitly formulated and carried 
through in such a manner as to be completely transparent to itself, then 
any treatment of it in line with the elucidations we have given requires 
us to explain how Being is to be looked at, how its meaning is to be under- 
stood and conceptually grasped; it requires us to prepare the way for 
choosing the right entity for our example, and to work out the genuine 
` way of access to it. Looking at something, understanding and conceiving it, 
choosing, access to it—all these ways of behaving are constitutive for our 
inquity, and therefore are modes of Being for those particular entities 


1 ‘Sein liegt im Dass- und Sosein, in Realität, Vorhandenheit, Bestand, Geltung, 
Dasein, im “es gibt”.” On “Vorhandenheit' (‘presence-at-hand’) see note |, p. "48, H. 25. 
On ‘Dasein’, see note 1, P. 27. 


Int. I Being and Time 27 


which we, the inquirers, are ourselves. Thus to work out the question of 
Being adequately, we must make an entity—the inquirer—transparent in 
his own Being. The very asking of this question is an entity’s mode of 
Being; and as such it gets its essential character from what is inquired 
about—namely, Being. This entity which each of us is himself and which 
includes inquiring as one of the possibilities of its Being, we shall denote 
by the term “Dasein”’.\ If we are to formulate our question explicitly and 
transparently, we must first give a proper explication of an entity (Dasein), 
with regard to its Being. 

Is there not, however, a manifest circularity in such an undertaking? 
If we must first define an entity in tts Being, and if we want to formulate 
the question of Being only on this basis, what is this but going in a circle? 
In working out our question, have we not ‘presupposed’ something which 
only the answer can bring? Formal objections such as the argument 
about ‘circular reasoning’, which can easily be cited at any time in the 
study of first principles, are always sterile when one is considering 
concrete ways of investigating, When it comes to understanding the matter 
at hand, they carry no weight and keep us from penetrating into the field 
of study. 

But factically* there is no circjg at all in formulating our question as 
we have described. One can determine the nature of entities in their Being 
without necessarily having the explicit concept of the meaning of Being 
at one’s disposal. Otherwise there could have been no ontological know- 
ledge heretofore. One would hardly deny that factically there has been 
such knowledge.® Of course ‘Being’ has been presupposed in all ontology 
up till now, but not as a concept at one’s disposal—not as the sort of thing 
we are seeking. This ‘presupposing’ of Being has rather the character of 
taking a look at it beforehand, so that in the light of it the entities pre- 
sented to us get provisionally Articulated in their Being. This guiding 

1 The word ‘Dasein’ plays so important a role in this work ang is already so familiar 
to the English reader who has read about Heid , that it seems simpler to 
leave it untranslated except in the Goan Co eat rare passages which Heidegger himself 
breaks it up with a hypthen (‘Da-sein') to show its etymological construction: literally 

-there’. Though in traditional German phil it may be used quite generally to 
stand for almost any kind of Being or ce ch we can say that something Aas 
(the ‘existence’ of God, for example), in er ee id it tends to be used more narrowly 
to stand for the kind of Being that cidegger follows the everyday usage 
in this respect, but goes somewhat ert in ther he often uses it to stand for any person 
who has such rand Who o huid ‘entity’ himself: See H. 11 below. 

3 ‘faktisch’. While this word can often be translated sim ly as ‘in fact’ or ‘as a matter of 
fact’, it is used both as an adjective and as an adverb and i is so characteristic of Heideg- 
ger's style that we shall as a rule translate it either as ‘factical’ or as ‘factically’, thus 
p its connection with the important noun ‘Faktizitar’ ( Noe a and keeping it 
distinct tatsächlich’ (‘factual’) and ‘wirklich’ (‘actual discussion of 


ge eee and ‘Faktizitat’ in Sections 12 and 29 below Abe „56, 135). 
. deren faktischen Bestand man wohl nicht leugnen wird 


28 Being and Time | Int. I 


activity of taking a look at Being arises from the average understanding 
of Being in which we always operate and which in the: end belongs to the 
essential constitution: of Dasein itself. Such ‘presupposing’ has nothing to do 
with laying down an axiom from which a sequence of propositions is 
deductively derived. It is quite impossible for there to be any ‘circular 
argument’ in formulating the question about the meaning of Bring; for 
in answering this question, the issue is not one of grounding something 
by such a derivation; it is rather one of laying bare the grounds for it 
and exhibiting them.? 

In the question of the meaning of Being there is no ‘circular reasoning’ 
but rather a remarkable ‘relatedness backward or forward’ which what 
we are asking about (Being) bears to the inquiry itself as a mode of Being 
of an entity. Here what is asked about has an essential pertinence to the 
inquiry itself, and this belongs to the ownmost meaning [eigensten Sinn] 
of the question of Being. This only means, however, that there is a way— 
perhaps even a very special one—in which entities with the character of 
Dasein are related to the question of Being. But have we not thus demon- 
strated that a certain kind of entity has a priority with regard to its Being ? 
And have we not thus presented that entity which shall serve as the 
primary example to be interrogated in the question of Being? So far our 
discussion has not demonstrated Dasein’s priority, nor has it shown 
decisively whether Dasein may possibly or even necessarily serve as the 
primary entity to be interrogated. But indeed something like a priority of 
Dasein has announced itself. 


€| 3. The Ontological Priority of the Question of Being 
When we pointed out the characteristics of the question of Being, 
taking as our clue the formal structure of the question as such, we made it 


1 ‘Wesensverfassung’. ‘Verfassung’ is the standard word for the ‘constitution’ of a 
nation or any political organization, but it is also used for the ‘condition’ or ‘state’ in 
which a person may find himself. Heidegger seldom uses the word in either of these senses; 
but he does use it in ways which are somewhat analogous. In one sense Dasein’s ‘Ver- 
fassung’ is its ‘constitution’, the way it is constituted, ‘sa condition humaine’. In another 
sense Dasein may have several ‘Verfassungen’ as constitutive ‘states’ or factors which 
enter into its ‘constitution’. We shall, in general, translate ‘Verfassung’ as ‘constitution’ or 
‘constitutive state’ according to the context; 'but in passages where ‘constitutive state’ 
would be cumbersome and there is little danger of ambiguity, we shall simply write 
‘state’. These states, however, must always be thought of as constitutive and essential, 
not as temporary or transitory stages like the ‘state’ of one’s health or the ‘state of the 
nation’, When Heidegger uses the word ‘Konstitution’, we shall usually indicate this by 
capitalizing ‘Constitution’. 

‘. .. weil es in der Beantwortung der Frage nicht um eine ableitende Begründung, 
sondern um aufweisende Grund-Freilegung geht.’ Expressions of the form ‘es geht... 


um— appear very often in this work. We shall usually translate them by variants on 
‘—is an issue for...’ l 


Int. I Being and Time 29 


clear that this question is a peculiar one, in that a series of fundamental 
considerations is required for working it out, not to mention for solving 
it. But its distinctive features will come fully to light only when we have 
delimited it adequately with regard to its function, its aim, and its 
motives. 

Hitherto our arguments for showing that the question must be restated 
have been motivated in part by its venerable origin but chiefly by the lack 
of a definite answer and even by the absence of any satisfactory formula- 
tion of the question itself. One may, however, ask what purpose this ques- 
tion is supposed to serve. Does it simply remain—or zs it at all—a mere 
matter for soaring speculation about the most general of generalities, or 
is tt rather, of all questions, both the most basic and the most concrete? 

Being is always the Being of an entity. The totality of entities can, in 
accordance with its various domains, become a field for laying bare 
and delimiting certain definite areas of subject-matter. These areas, on 
their part (for instance, history, Nature, space, life, Dasein, language, 
and the like), can serve_as objects which corresponding scientific 
investigations may take as their respective themes. Scientific research 
accomplishes, roughly and naively, the demarcation and initial fixing of 
the areas of subject-matter. The basic structures of any such area have 
already been worked out after a fashion in our pre-scientific ways of 
experiencing and interpreting that domain of Being in which the area of 
subject-matter is itself confined. The ‘basic concepts’ which thus arise: 
remain our proximal clues for disclosing this area concretely for the first: 
time. And although research may always lean towards this positive 
approach, its real progress comes not so much from collecting results and 
storing them away in ‘manuals’ as from inquiring into the ways in which 
each particular area is basically constituted [Grundverfassungen]—an 
inquiry to which we have been driven mostly by reacting against just 
such an increase in information. 

The real ‘movement’ of the sciences takes place when their basic con- 
cepts undergo a more or less radical revision which is transparent to‘itself. 
The level which a science has reached is determined by how far it is 
capable of a crisis in its basic concepts. In such immanent crises the very 
relationship between positively investigative inquiry and those things 
themselves that are under interrogation comes to a point where it begins 
to totter. Among the various disciplines everywhere today there are 
freshly awakened tendencies to put research on new foundations. 

Mathematics, which is seemingly the most rigorous and most firmly 
constructed of the sciences, has reached a crisis in its ‘foundations’. In 
the controversy between the formalists and the intuitionists, the issue is 


Io 


30 Being and Time Int. I 


one of obtaining and securing the primary way of access to what are 
supposedly the objects of this science. The relativity ” :ory of phystes 
arises from the tendency to exhibit the interconnectedne:s of ısature as 
it is ‘in itself’. As a theo-y of the conditions under which we have access 
to Nature itself, it seeks td preserve the changelessness of the laws of 
motion by ascertaining all relativities, and thus comes up against. the 
question of the structure of its own given area of study—the problem of 
matter. In biology there is an awakening tendency to inquire beyond the 
definitions which mechanism and vitalism have given for “life” and 
“organism”, and to define anew the kind of Being which belongs to the 
living as such. In those humane sciences which are historiological in character, 
the urge towards historical actuality itself has been strengthened in the 
course of time by tradition and by the way tradition has been presented 
and handed down: the history of literature is to become the history of 
problems. Theology is seeking a more primordial interpretation of man’s 
Being towards God, prescribed by the meaning of faith itself and remaining 
within it. It is slowly beginning to understand once more Luther's insight 
that the ‘foundation’ on which its system of dogma rests has not arisen 
from an inquiry in which faith is primary, and that conceptually: this 
‘foundation’ not only is inadequate for the problematic of theology, but 
conceals and distorts it. 

Basic concepts determine the way in which we get an understanding 
beforehand of the area of subject-matter underlying all the objects a 
science takes as its theme, and all positive investigation is guided by this 
understanding. Only after the area itself has been explored beforehand 
in a corresponding manner do these concepts become genuinely demon- 
strated and ‘grounded’. But since every such area is itself obtained from 
the domain of entities themselves, this preliminary research, from which 
the basic concepts are drawn; signifies nothing else than an interpretation 
of those entities with regard to their basic state of Being. Such research 
must run ahead of the positive sciences, and it can. Here the work of Plato 
and Aristotle is evidence enough. Laying the foundations for the sciences 
in this way is different in principle from the kind of ‘logic’ which limps 
along after, investigating the status of some science as it chances to find 
it, in order to discover its ‘method’, Laying the foundations, as we have 
described it, is rather a productive eo the sense that it leaps ahead, 


1 ‘In den historischen Geisteiissenschaften . i Heidegger makes much of the distinction 

between ‘Historie’ and ‘Geschichte’ and AN corresponding adjectives ‘historisch’ and 

tlith’, ‘Historie’ stands for what Heidegger calls a ‘science of history’. (See 

. 3755 378.) ) ‘Geschichte’ usually stands for the kind of ‘history’ that actually happens. We 

shall as rule translate these respectively aş ‘historiology’ and ‘history’, nn Sa 
conventions in handling the two adjectives. See especially Sections 6 and 76 be 


Int. I Being and Time nn: La 
as it were, into some area-of-Being, discloses it for the first time in the. 
constitution of its Being, and, after thus arriving at the structures within 
it, makes these available to the positive sciences as transparent assign 
ments: for their inquiry.! To give an example, what is philosophically 
ptimary is neither a theory of the concept-formation of historiology § jor. 
the theory of historiological knowledge, nor yet the theory of history as 
the Object of historiology; what is primary is rather the Interpretation of 
authentically historical entities as regards their ‘histofieality. Similarly 
the positive outcome of Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason lies in What it has 
contributed towards the working out of what belongs t6 any Nature 
whatsoever; not in a ‘theory’ of knowledge. His transcendental logie is at 
a priori logie for the subject-matter of that area of Being called “Nature”. 

But such an inquiry itself—ontology taken in the widest sense without 
favouring any particular ‘ontological directions or tendencies—requires a 
further clue. Ontological i inqury is indeed more primordial, as over against 
the ontica]® inquiry of the positive sciences. But it remains itself naive and 
opaque if in its researches into the Being of entities it falls to discuss the 
meaning of Being i in general. And even the ontological task of cönstruct- 
ing a non-deduttive genealogy | of the different possible ways of Being. 
requires thät we first cpme\to an understanding of ‘what we really mead 
by this expression “Being” ’. 

The question of Bein aims therefore at ascertaining the a priori owe 
tions not only for the possibility of the sciences which examine entities 
as entities of such and such a type, and, in so doing, already operate 
with an understanding. of Being, but also for. the possibility of those 
ontologies themselves which are priör to the ontical sciences and which 
prövide their fouadations. Basically, all ontology, no matter how rich and 
firmly compacted 2 system of categories it has at its disposal, remains blind and per- 
verted from its ownmost aim, if it has not first adequately clarified the meaning 
of Being, and conceived this clarification as its fundamental task. 

Ontological research itself, when. properly understood, gives to the 
question of Being an ontological priority which goes beyond mere resump- 
tion of a venerable tradition and advancement with a problem that has 
hitherto been opaque. But this objectively scientific priority is not the 
a one. 

. als durchsichtige Anweisungen des Fragens „. > 

z «|. sondern die Intepretation des eigentlich | geschichtlich Seienden auf seine Ges- 

chichtlichkeit’. We shall translate the reanl occurring term ‘Geschichtlichkeit’ as 


‘historicality’. Heid very rel uses the term ‘Historizitat’, as on H. 20 below, 
and this will be translated as ‘historici 

8 While the terms ‘ontisch’ (“ontical”) and ‘ontologisch’ (‘ ontological’) are not explicitly 
defined, their rheanings will emerge rather clearly. Ontological inquiry is concerned 
primarily with Being; ontical inquiry is concerned primarily with entities and the facts 
about them. 


I2 


32 Being and Time Int. I 
| 4. The Ontical Priority of the Question of Being 

Science in general may be defined as the totality established through an 
interconnection of true propositions. ! This definition is not complete, nor 
does it reach the meaning of science. As ways in which man behaves, 
sciences have the manner of Being which this entity—man himself— pos- 
sesses. This entity we denote by the term “Dasein’’. Scientific research is 
not the only manner of Being which this entity can have, nor is it the 
one which lies closest. Moreover, Dasein itself has a special distinctiveness 
as compared with other entities, and it is worth our while to bring this to 
view in a provisional way. Here our discussion must anticipate later 
analyses, in which our results will be authentically exhibited for the first time. 

Dasein is an entity which does not just occur among other entities. 
Rather it is ontically. distinguished by the fact that, in its very Being, 
that Being is an tsswe for it. But in that case, this is a constitutive state of 
Dasein’s Being, and this implies that Dasein, in its Being, has a relation- 
ship towards that Being—a relationship which itself is one of Being.” And 
this means further that there is scrne way in which Dasein understands 
itself in its Being, and that to some degree it does so explicitly. It is pecu- 
liar to this entity that with and through its Being, this Being is disclosed 
to it. Understanding of Being is itself a definite characteristic of Dasein’s Being. 
Dasein is ontically distinctive in that it is ontological.’ 

Here “Being-ontological” is not yet tantamount to “developing an 
ontology”. So if we should reserve the term “ontology” for that theoreti- 
cal inquiry which is explicitly devoted to the meaning of entities, then what 
we have had in mind in speaking of Dasein’s ““Being-ontological” is to be 
designated as something “pre-ontological’’. It does not signify simply 
“being-ontical”, however, but rather “being in such a way that one has 
an understanding of Being”. 

That kind of Being towards which Dasein can comport itself in one 
way or another, and always does comport itself somehow, we call “exzs- 
tence” [Existenz]. And because we cannot define Dasein’s essence by citing 
a “what” of the kind that pertains to a subject-matter [eines sachhaltigen 
Was], and because its essence lies rather in the fact that in each case it 


ee ‘,. . das Ganze eines Begriindungszusammenhanges wahrer Sätze . . ? See H. 357 
ow. 


3 ‘Zu dieser Seinsverfassung des Daseins gehört aber dann, dass es in seinem Sein zu 
diesern Sein ein Seinsverhältnis hat.’ This passage is ambiguous and might also be read 
ns x and this implies that Dasein, in its Being towards this Being, has a relationship of 

g. 

8%‘... dass es ontologisch ist’. As ‘ontologisch’ may be either an adjective or an 
adverb, we might also write: ‘. . . that it is ontologically’. A similar ambiguity occurs in 
the two following sentences, where we read ‘Ontologisch-sein’ and ‘ontisch-seiend’ 
respectively. 


Int. I Being and Time 33 


has its Being to be, and has it as its own,! we Wave chosen to designate 
this entity as “Dasein”, a term which is purely an expression of its Being 
[als reiner Seinsansdruck]. 

Dasein always understands itself in terms of its existence—in terms of a 
possibility of itself: to be itself or not itself. Dasein has either chosen these 
possibilities itself, or got itself into them, or grown up in them already. 
Only the particular Dasein decides its existence, whether it does so by 
taking hold or by neglecting. The question of existence never gets straight- 
ened out except through existing itself. ‘The understanding of oneself which 
leads along this way we call “existentiell”’ 7 The question of existence is one 
of Dasein’s. ontical ‘affairs’. This does not require that the ontological 
structure of existence should be theoretically transparent. The question 
about that structure aims at the analysis [Auseinanderlegung}] of what 
constitutes existence. The context [Zusammenhang] of such structures we 
call “existentzality”. Its analytic has the character of an understanding 
which is not existentiell, but rather existential. The task of an existential 
analytic of Dasein has been delineated in advance, as regards both its 
possibility and its necessity, in Dasein’s ontical constitution. 

So far as existence 1s the determining character of Dasein, the onto- 
logical analytic cf this entity always requires that existentiality be con- 
sidered beforehand. By “existentiality”’ we understand the state of Being 
that is constitutive for those entities that exist. But in the idea of such a 
constitutive state of Being, the idea of Being is already included. And thus 
even the possibility of carrying through the analytic of Dasein depends on 
working out beforehand the question about the meaning of Being in general. 

Sciences are ways of Being in which Dasein comports itself towards 
entities which it need not be itself. But to Dasein, Being in a world is 
something that belongs essentially. Thus Dasein’s understanding of Being 
pertains with equal primordiality both to an understanding of something 
like a ‘world’, and to the understanding of the Being of those entities 
which become accessible within the world. So whenever an ontology 
takes for its theme entities whose character of Being is other than that of 
Dasein, it has its own foundation and motivation in Dasein’s own ontical 
structure, in which a pre-ontological understanding of Being is comprised 
as a definite characteristic. 


1‘, . dass es je sein Sein als seiniges zu scin hat...’ 

2 We shall translate ‘existenziell’ bv ‘existenticl]’, and ‘existenzial’ bv ‘existential’ 
There seems to be little reason for resorting to the more eiaborate neologisms proposed by 
other writers. 

3%. . innerhalb der Welt . . .’ Heidegger uses at least three expressions which 
might be translated as ‘in the world’: ‘innerhalb der Welt’, ‘in der Welt’, and the adjective 
(or adverb) ‘innerweltlich’. We shall translate these respectively by ‘within the world’, 
‘in the world’, and ‘within-the-world’. 


13 


14 


34 Being and Time Inr. I 


Therefore fundamental ontology, from which alone all other ontologies 
can take their rise, must be sought in the existential analytic of Dasein, 

Dasein accordingly takes priority over all other entities in several ways. 
The first priority is an ontical one: Dasein is an entity whose Being has the 
determinate «haracter of e” -tence. The second priority is an ontological 
one: Dasein is ir .tself‘ontol: i:cal’, because existence is thus determinative 
for it. But with egual prime~.:i::utv Dasein also possesses—as constitutive 
for its under: sanding of ex} n.e--ah understanding of the Being of -il 
entities of a character othe: han its own. Dasein has therefore a third 
priority as prd¥iding the ontico-ontological condition for the possibility 
of any ontologies. Thus Dasein has turned out to be. more than any other 
entity, the one which: nmst first be interrogated ontologically. 

But the. roots- of the existential analytic,.on its part, are ultimately 


‚ existentiell; that is,-ontteal.. Only if the inquiry of philosophical research i: 
itself seized upon in an existentiell manner as a possibility of the Being 


of each existing Dasein; does it become at all possible to disclose the 
existentiality of existence and to undertake an adequately founded onto 
logical problematic. But with this, the ontical priority of the question o 
being has also become plain. 

Dasein’s ontico-ontological priority was seen quite early, thougl 
Dasein itself was not grasped in its genuine ontological structure, and dic 


not éven become a problem i in which this structure was sought. Aristotle 


says: N yuy) và övra mus otmi “Man’s soul is, in a certain way 
entities.” The ‘soul’ which makes up the Being of man has aleðyos anc 
vöoncıs among its ways of Being, and in these it discovers all entities, bott 
in the fact that they are, and in their Being as they are—that is, always 
in their Being. Aristotle’s principle, which points back to the ontological 
thesis of Parmenides, is one which Thomas Aquinas has taken up in a 
characteristic discussion. Thomas is ‘engaged in the task of deriving the 
“transcendentia’—those characters of Being which lie beyond every possible 
way in which an entity may be classified as coming under some generic 
kind of subject-matter (every modus specialis entis), and which belong 
necessarily to anything, whatever it may be. Thomas has to demonstrate 
that the verum is such a transcendens. He does this by invoking an entity 
which, in accordance with its very manner of Being, is properly suited 
to ‘come together with’ entities of any sort whatever. This distinctive 
entity, the ens quod natum est convenire cum omni ente, is the soul (anima).Yit 
Here the priority of ‘Dasein’ over all other entities emerges, although it 
has not been ontologically clarified. This priority has obviously nothing 
in common with a vicious subjectivizing of the totality of entities. 

By indicating Dasein’s ontico-ontological priority in this provisional 


Int. I Being and Time 35 
mariner, we have grounded our demonstration that the question of Being 
is ontico-ontologically distinctive. But when we analysed the structure of 
this question as such (Section 2), we came up against a distinctive way 
in which this entity functions in the very formulation of that question. 
Dasein then revealed itself as that entity which must first be worked out 
in an ontologically adequate manner, if the inquiry is to become a trans- 
parent one. But now it has been shown that the ontological analytic of 
Dasein in general is what makes up fundamental ontology, so that Dasein 
functions as that entity which in principle is to be interrogated beforehand 
as to its Being. | 

If to Interpret the meaning of Being becomes our task, Dasein is not 
only the primary entity to be interrogated; it is also that entity which 
already comports itself, in its Being, towards what we are asking about 
when we ask this question. But in that case the question of Being is nothing 
other than the radicalization of an essential tendency-of-Being which 
belongs to Dasein itself—the pre-ontological understanding of Being. 


15 


Il 


THE TWOFOLD TASK IN WORKING OUT THE 
QUESTION OF BEING. METHOD AND DESIGN OF 
OUR INVESTIGATION 


G 5. The Ontological Analytic of Dasein as Laying Bare the Horizon for an 
Interpretation of the Meaning of Being in General 

In designating the tasks of ‘formulating’ the question of Being, we have 
shown not only that we must establish which entity is to serve as our 
primary object of interrogation, but also that the right way of access to this 
entity is one which we must explicitly make our own and held secure. We 
have already discussed which entity takes over the principal role within 
the question of Being. But how are we, as it were, to set our sights towards 
this entity, Dasein, both as something accessible to us and as something 
to be understood and zaterpreted ? 

In demonstrating that Dasein in ontico-ontologically prior, we may 
have misled the reader into supposin;; that this entity must also be what 
is given as ontico-ontologically primary not only in the sense that it can 
itself be grasped ‘immediately’, but also in that the kind of Being which 
it possesses is presented just as ‘immediately’. Ontically, of course, Dasein 
is not only close to us—even that which is closest: we are it, each of us, 
we ourselves. In spite of this, or rather for just this reason, it is ontologically 
that which is farthest. To be sure, its ownmost Being is such that it has 
an understanding of that Being, and already maintains itself in each case 
as if its Being has been interpreted in some manner, But we are certainly 
not saying that when Dasein’s own Being is thus interpreted pre-ontologi- 
cally in the way which lies closest, this interpretation can be taken over 
as an appropriate clue, as if this way of understanding Being is what must 
emerge when one’s ownmost state of Being is considered! as an onto- 
logical theme. The kind of Being which belongs to Dasein is rather such 
that, in understanding its own Being, it has a tendency to do so in terms 
of that entity towards which it comports itself proximally and in a way 
which is essentially constant—in terms of the ‘world’, In Dasein itself, 
and therefore in its own understanding of Being, the way the world is 


1 ‘Besinnung’. The earliest editions have ‘Besummung’ instead. 


Int, II Being and Time 37 


understood is, as we shall show, reflected back ontologically upon the way 
in which Dasein itself gets interpreted. 

Thus because Dasein is ontico-ontologically prior, its own specific state 
of Being (if we understand this in the sense of Dasein’s ‘categorial 
structure’) remains concealed from it. Dasein is ontically ‘closest’ to itself 
and ontologically farthest; but pre-ontologically it is surely not a stranger. 

Here we have merely indicated provisionally that an Interpretation of 
this entity is confronted with peculiar difficulties grounded in the kind of 
Being which belongs to the object taken as our theme and to the very 
behaviour of so taking it. These difficulties are not grounded in any short- 
comings of the cognitive powers with which we are endowed, or in the 
lack of a suitable way of conceiving—a lack which seemingly would not 
be hard to remedy, 

Not only, however, does an understanding of Being belong to Dasein, 
but this understanding develops or decays along with whatever kind of 
Being Dasein may possess at the time; accordingly there are many ways in 
which it has been interpreted, and these are all at Dasein’s disposal. 
Dasein’s ways of behaviour, its capacities, powers, possibilities, and vicis- 
situdes, have been studied with varying extent in philosophical psychology, 
in anthropology, ethics, and ‘political science’, in poetry, biography, and 
the writing of history, each in a different fashion. But the question remains 
whether these interpretations of Dasein have been carried through with 
a primordial existentiality comparable to whatever existentiell prim- 
ordiality they may have possessed. Neither of these excludes the 
other but they do not necessarily go together. Existentiell interpre- 
tation can demand an existential analytic, if indeed we conceive of 
philosophical cognition as something possible and nece:sary. Only when 
the basic structures of Dasein have ! en wiequate -«rked out with 
explicit orientation towards the prot! o: vi Being icii, will what we 
have hitherto gained in interpreting D.::::in get its existential justification, 

Thus an analytic of Dasein must remain our first requirement in the 
question of Being. But in that case the ;:robiem of obtaining an:' securing 
the kind of access which will lead to Lic... „ecorneseven more burning 
one. To put it negatively, we have ne © ht to resort to dogmati. :onstruc- 
tions and to apply just any idea of Be...) aradi actus: -v to this tity, no 
matter how ‘self-evident’ that idea ~. w.: norm v any of .ne ‘cate- 
gories’ which such an idea prescribe se reces unon Dase:. without 
proper ontological consideration. We caus. nes choose such a way of 
access and such: a kinvi of interpretation tha <o can sh. itself in 
itself and from itseif [an ihm selbsi von iin. szihrt her]. And, this 
means that it is to be shown as it is proxtmaly and for the most part— 


16 


17 


38 Being and Time Int. il 


in its average everydayness.! In this everydayness there are certain structures 
which we shall exhibit—not just any accidental structures, but essential 
ones which, in every kind of Being that factical Dasein may possess, 
persist as determinative for the character of its Being. Thus by having 
regard for the basic state of Dasein’s everydayness, we shall bring out the 
Being of this entity in a preparatory fashion. | 

When taken in this way, the analytic of Dasein remains wholly ofiented 
towards the guiding task of working out the question of Being. Its limits 
are thus determined. It cannot attempt to provide a complete ontology of 
Dasein, which assuredly must be constructed if anything like a ohio 
sophical’ anthropology is to have a philosophically adequate basis. 2 

If our purpose is to make such an anthropology possible, or to lay its 
oniological foundations, our Interpretation will provide only some of the 
“neces, even though they are by no means ınessential ones. Our 
analysis of Dasein, however, is not only incomplete, it ts also, in the first 
instance, provisional. It merely brings out the Bein of this entity, without 
Interpreting its meaning. It is rather a preparatory procedure by which 
the horizon for the most primordial way of interpreting Being may be 
laid hare. Ones we have arrived at that horizon, this ureparatory analytic 
of Dasein wil nave to be repeated on a higher anu authentically onto- 
logical } 

Ye caal ae to tempera’ ty" as the meaniny of Ku Being of that entity 
Dasein”. If this is te be devionsti2' cd, those stractures of 
Hash winch we shall provisionaive exhibit ruost ie interpreted over 
ago @ us modes of RD ig thus inter sreung Desea as teruperality, 
saali not give the answer to zur kcal 2 question as to the 
ithe h oi beng in general. But the grou wi wili bave been prevared for 
z such an answer. 


DASis. 


when we Tall 


i? hie i er, We 


IE 
Eur Wy Er tig 


war scil sie das Feiendein den zeigen. tees ur‘ aT era fet In cedar 


A a a aoe aud os hs xd EN An t ZA 
eure: ci onilehen Wltggliehtent Fhe phrase ‘zun. chst wad o ores u one that occurs 
yore Dan, nough Heidegger does not explain it cati Secsor u èz 579 blow, where 

‘ . ul. A a en ee tun een we : _ 

rg Chas 109 gen cxplaimed. On 'zunächet” our... 0.855 

: aes “de Sot we a eee naa tks Rega SAL e Deak Bel eek oe ee eek ee ae 
VR ke OAS BIONORTT RR RR Tis l TO BAR ap ASE Bee Sic ae as 
` “ b © . er -~ $ 
‘ oor A ta es EI EER p 
Lae | 
i f philc at 2 | 
i : itest s P t a vo -r 
4 
a ana 
` 
R 8 terse TUN ast ai Bees 
2 pir i f = > 1 
? we : 2. ` By 
we er 2 
e a e A ite EEE AAN Tash NE a ae es A a Be 
A ale a Ye: os g = .. St R T A BR nen: : un: ys r Copp eD ayy! ik vty ae 
“ot ak So lay Stan fee ERBE I oo. ss she 2, aise "49 re Re EOE: Er ae, ag tet 


é 
$ 


AnA m a sense which he will expiain lat e (E. ig). We shail transiei: ed am av 


‘em porality’ and ‘Temporal’, with initial capitals. 


x En 


Int. II Being and Time 39 


We have already intimated that Dasein has a pre-ontological Being as 
its ontically constitutive state. Dasein ts in such a way as to be some- 
thing which understands something like Being.! Keeping this inter- 
connection firmly in mind, we shall show that whenever Dasein tacitly 
understands and interprets something like Being, it does so with 
time as its standpoint. Time must be brought to light—and genuinely 
conceived—as the horizon for all understanding of Being and for any 
way of interpreting it. In order for us to discern this, time needs to be 
explicated primordially as ihe horizon for the understanding of Being, and in terms 
of temporality as the Being of Dasein, which understands Being. This task as a 
whole requires that the conception of time thus obtained shall be dis- 
tinguished from the way in which it is ordinarily understood. This 
ordinary way of understanding it has become explicit in an interpretation 
precipitated in the traditional concept of time, which has persisted from 
Aristotle to Bergson and even later. Here we must make clear that this 
concepticn of time and, in general, the ordinary way of understanding it, 
have sprung from temporality, and we must show how this has come 
about. We shall thereby restore to the ordinary conception the autonomy 
which is its rightful due, as against Bergson’s thesis that the time one has 
in mind in this conception is space. 

‘Time’ has iong functioned as an ontological—or rather an ontical-- 
criterion for naively discriminating various realms of entities. A distinc- 
tion has "wen made between ‘temporal’ entities (naturai processes and 
Rigtorical > »ppenings) and ‘nou-temporal’ entities (spatial and numerical 
-elationshins:. We are accustomed to contrasting the ‘timeless’ meaning 

af praposiden3 with the ‘temroral course of propositional assertions. it is 
alko held thes there is a ‘cle:vage’ between ‘temooral’ entities and the 
‘supra-temporal’ eternal, and effor:s are made to bricge this over. Here 
‘temporal siways means simply being Iseiend] “in time’—a designation 
which, adm: ttecly, is still pretty obscure. The Yast remains that time, in 


x 


the sense of ‘ce ng [sein] in time’, functions as a criterion for distinguishing 
realms of Bene Fit he erto no one has asked or troubled to investigate how 
thae has come 15 Dave this Cistinetive a unction, or with what 
eos, a mace Scie ee Bee Pee BES ar yes 

oe SNE T IS Zanker 


. . Dr 3 » ra 
. N ab m ” i P i 
DOT DETE tem S Pr nn. ~ la yD‘ se be eaa rn 
E CAR Lara akt in, Bin ha wee COU MU aa Ty at 


t 5 a? FR 2 4 s 
> a as, t aay a7 ~~ DN `~ 
is Ge ul un ror Tees Sa. ie { 
a in . N 
verila “ae gets ead a tts 
eo ah as 4 Darden eet ‘ t 
r> ik i 
<4 
acs ET u, at 


18 


19 


40 Being and Time Int. II 


In contrast to all this, our treatment of the question of the meaning of 
Being must enable us to show that the central broblematic of all ontology ts 
rooted in the phenomenon of time, tf rightly seen and rightly explained, and we 
must show how this is the case. 

If Being is to be conceived in terms of time, and if, indeed, its various 
modes and derivatives are to become intelligible in their respective 
modifications and derivations by taking time into consideration, then 
Being itself (and not merely entities, let us say, as entities ‘in time’) is 
thus made visible in its ‘temporal’ character. But in that case, ‘temporal’ 
can no longer mean simply ‘being in time’. Even the ‘non-temporal’ and 
the ‘supra-temporal’ are ‘temporal’ with regard to their Being, and not 
just privatively by contrast with something ‘temporal’ as an entity ‘in 
time’, but in a positive sense, though it is one which we must first explain. 
In both pre-philosophical and philosophical usage the expression ‘tem- 
poral’ has been pre-empted by the signification we have cited; in the 
following investigations, however, we shall employ it for another significa- 
tion. Thus the way in which Being and its modes and characteristics have 
their meaning determined primordially in terms of time, is what we shall 
call its “Temporal” determinateness.! Thus the fundamental ontological 
task of Interpreting Being as such ineludes working out the Temporality of 
Being. In the exposition of the problematic of Temporality the question 
of the meaning of Being will first be concretely answered. 

Because Being cannot be grasped except by taking time into considera- 
tion, the answer to the question of Being cannot lie in any proposition that 
is blind and isolated. The answer is not properly conceived if what it 
asserts propositionally is just passed along, especially if it gets circulated 
as a free-floating result, sọ. that we merely get informed about a 
‘standpoint’ which may: perhaps differ from the way this has hitherto 
been treated. Whether the answer is a ‘new’ one remains quite superficial 
and is of no importance. Its positive character must lie in its being ancient 
enough for us to learn to conceive. the possibilities which the ‘Ancients’ 
have made ready for us. In its ownmost meaning this answer tells us that 
concrete ontological research must begin with an investigative inquiry 
which keeps within the horizon we have laid bare; and this is all that it 
tells us. | 

If, then, the answer to the question of Being is to provide the clues for 
our research, it cannot be adequate until it brings us the insight that the 
specific kind of Being of ontology hitherto, and the vicissitudes of its 
inquiries, its findings, and its failures, have been necessitated in the very 
character of Dasein. 

1 ‘seine temperale Bestimmtheit’. See our note 3, p. 38, H. 17 above. 


Int. II Being and Time 4! 
T 6. The Task of Destroying the History of Ontology 


All research—and not least that which operates within the range of the 
central question of Being—is an ontical possibility of Dasein. Dasein’s 
Being finds its meaning in temporality. But temporality is also the con- 
dition which makes historicality possible as a temporal kind of Being 
which Dasein itself possesses, regardless of whether or how Dasein is an 
entity ‘in time’. Historicality, as a determinate character, is prior to.what 
is called “history” (world-historical historizing).! 

“Historicality” stands for the state of Being that is constitutive for 
Dasein’s ‘historizing’ as such; only on the basis of such ‘historizing’ is 
anything like ‘world-history’ possible or can anything belong historically 
to world-history. In its factical Being, any Dasein is as it already was, and 
it is ‘what’ it already was. It is its past, whether explicitly or not. And this 
is so not only in that its past is, as it were, pushing itself along ‘behind’ it, 
and that Dasein possesses what is past as a property which is still present- 
at-hand and which sometimes has after-effects upon it: Dasein ‘is’ its past 
in the way of its own Being, which, to put it roughly, *historizes’ out of its 
future on each occasion.? Whatever the way of being it may have at the 
time, and thus with whatever understanding of Being it may possess, 
Dasein has grown up both into and in a traditional way of interpreting 
itself: in terms of this it understands itself proximally and, within a certain 
range, constantly. By this understanding, the possibilities of its Being are 
disclosed and regulated. Its own past—and this always means the past of 
its ‘generation’—is not something which follows along after Dasein, but 
something which already goes ahead of it. 

This elemental historicality of Dasein may remain hidden irom Dasein 
itself. But there is a way by which it can be discovered and given proper 
atzenıion. Dasein can discover tradition, preserve it, and study i: explicitly. 
The discovery of tradition and the disclosure of what it ‘irar..mits’ and 
how this is transmitted, can be taken hold of as a task in its o'v;: sight. In 
this way Dasein brings itself into the kind of Being which consists in 
hisic. ‘ological inquiry and research. But historiology—or mer. precisely 
his.uiicity*—-is possible as a kind of Being which the inquiring {\... "in may 

1 --veltgeschichtliches Geschehen’. While the verb ‘geschehen’ ordina: ii means to 
‘ho :oen’, and will often be so translated, Heidegger stresses its etymologica’ kinship to 
‘G wichte or ‘history’. To bring out this connection, we have coined the veti: ‘historize’, 
wotu taught be paraphrased as to ‘ha in a historical way’; we shall usuaiiy translate 
‘goschencn’ this way in contexts where history is being discussed. We trust tat tue reader 
wil becx in mind that such ‘historizing’ ts characteristic of all historical entices, and is not 
the cori of thing that is done primarily by historians (as ‘phil sonaizius’ Pos instance, 
is 02:2 by pbilcsophers). (On ‘world-historical’ sce H. g$: ff: 

$ ‘Das Dasein “ist” seine Vergangenheit in der Weise sewes Seins, das, roh gesagt, 
jeweils aus seiner Zukunft her “ icht’’.’ 

5 ‘Historizitat’. Cf. note 2, p. 31. H. 10 above. 


20 


ai 


42 Beng and Time Int. I 
possess, only because historicality is a determining characteristic for 
Dasein in the very basis of its Being. If this historicality remains hidden 
from Dasein, and as long as it so remains, Dasein is also denied the 
possibility of historiological inquiry or the discovery of history. If his- 
toriology is wanting, this is not evidence against Dasein’s historicality; on 
the contrary, as a deficient mode! of this state of Being, it is evidence for 
it. Only because it is ‘historical’ can an era be unhistoriological. 

On the other hand, if Dasein has seized upon its latent possibility not 
anly of making its own existence transparent to itself but also cf inquiring 
into the meaning of existentiality itself (that is to say, of previously 
inquiring into the meaning of Being in general), and if by such inquiry 
its eyes have been opened to its own essential historicality, then one cannot 
fail to see that the inquiry into Being (the ontico-ontoiogical necessity of 
which we have already indicated) is itself characterized by historicality. 
The ownmost meaning of Being which belongs to the inquiry into Being 
as an historical inquiry, gives us the assignment [Anweisung] cf inquiring 
into the history of that inquiry itself, that is, of becoming histonological. 
In working out the question of Being, we must heed this assignment, so 
that by positively making the past our own, we may bring ourselves into 
full possession of the ownmost possibuities of such inquiry. The question 
of the meaning of Being rast be carried t...ough by expiicai.ng Dasein 
beforehand in its temporality and historicauty: the question us brings 
itself to the point where it understands itself as histownlngiczs. 

Our preparatory Interpretation of the fundamenta! strvscures of 
Dasein with vegard to the average kind of Being which is ciuses. to iz 
(a kind of Being in which it is ‘herefore proximally historical as weil), 
will make manifest, however, nat only that Dazenı is inclined to fat back 
upon its world (the world in which it is) and to interpret itself in terms of 
that world by its reflected light, but also that Dasein simultaneousiy falls 
prey to the tradition of which it has more or less exelicitiy taken hold.? 
This tradition keeps it from providing its own guidance, whiner in 


ad 


+ ‘defintentes Modus’. Heidegger Hikes to i jak of certain charzcreristus ar occur 


ir E sways OF ime des’, anong which ame Di incl lad certain ways aT fr to Eng 
Be See en mes An Meier. 
ii nero au“ ri nE EGA S EON Oe a a EROU ei we rae 
0, AL itive pos has a oo 

das Dasei: hot plcheicy dia Couche oer, ar wine Welt, in ders ci. can vwöälen 

qi reizen aus ina ET yC a ase: alt m eins damit vc: onner mehr 
ae Ue fe ST ni ge 5 The verb 'wertällen 3 Say which 
iv, es er „well Ne MESES SEES, x ocal t 5 Ban sually yursinte tt Sor gee oe pee eran 
à 3 Ku u un! . ` 
dar un Ole hs Sou. SF Ga 2 S Ta T Aa hg Ra Wee pb toe 28 rare g SpE CsA Ss FESR TENE i 
Sour valis prev eee Gui aS Cette aR en ebay A A AE Pa Ran a 

G be muSseadi og uf a, a et t ann crag ia oe ww rn den cate duwodeng 

Sisi ATS aus WE go eme yip an a ne ELEN ee eur and un 


si >i rere. 


ona 


Int. II Being and Time 43 


inquiring or in choosing. This holds true—and by no means least—for that 
understanding which is rooted in Dasein’s ownmost Being, and for the 
possibility of developing it—namely, for ontological understanding. 

When tradition thus becomes master, it does so in such a way that what 
it ‘transmits’ is made so inaccessible, proximally and for the most part, 
that it rather becomes concealed. Tradition takes what has come down to 
us and delivers it over to self-evidence; it blocks our access to those 
primordial ‘sources’ from which the categories and concepts handed down 
to us have been in part quite genuinely drawn.! Indeed it makes us forget 
that they have had such an origin, and makes us suppose that the neces- 
sity of going back to these sources is something which we need not even 
understand. Dascin has had its nistoricality so thoroughly uprooted by 
tradition that it coniines its interest to the multiformity of possible types, 
directions, and standpoints of philosophical activity in the most exotic 
and alien of cultures; and by this very interest it seeks to veil the fact that 
it has no ground of its own to stand on. Consequently, despite all its 
historiological interests and all us zeal for an interpretation which is 
phiiotogically ‘objective’ [“‘sachlich«’’], Dasein no longer understands the 
most elementary conditions which would alone enable it to go back to 
the Gast in a positive manner amd maxke it productively its own. 

We have shown at the outset (Szciicn 1) nut only that the question of 
the meaning of being is one tha. nas sot been attended to and one that 
nas been iradequate.v inrmulat 3, bet that it has become quite forgotte: 
‘a spite of ali our interest in ‘me’ aonysics’. Greek ontology and its history 
—whicn, in their numerous filriiions and distorticns, determine the con- 
cepias! character or philosophy even teday—prove that when Daseri 

understands either itil or. Being im general, it devs so in terms of th. 
“world, ae that the ontology s.bich has thus arisen has cieveriorate:. 
[verilit] in in a ivadition in which i it cere reduced to something self-evident 
—mereic mal oe jap reworking, «: i was for Hegel. In the Middle Ages 
this comooted Greek ontology bern 1 fixed body ofdecırıne. Its syste- 
maies, nöowever, is by no means & mere icining together of tradition. 
Nice. Trough e berg a. cf Being ha 


” FR Ka N Lagata vs 
š a ayy an er . 


vu... vet 1 > AS A shka a tes is M & 4 
Sauga $0665 25S Lerch, A a catai of un: 
Fr aig tgs Nase | x Moe Aap vageh UG En Hr + Wit: 
E ee x im it rier om Pere ta 1 sin it: È tne its e Ivl a: 

r $ š ae ; ` 
oa ren ar Syke SE Or Se aT oo: ONTMIETY Nas 
An >. =» . wA, E EA tS ak. awk, ‘ BR DEE SR uk“ I. . of ww Va ke aA, `, icc 
: A he : cad haat a le ae ` Sees en Ce eal eR eer Th eee 

Paces Manoa AEST Gar oor es TL SE ee ee 
"un. - or Oi ry > eee Be RS a. ne `- . ` es 3 mn. de. 
SE er N VE EN Ra BE, aan ke ade. 
a .. 
3 i - Nt x Ze TrA ot 
~ - v —_ ~ aera 
Lata. sa a ane ‘cores bevincing sich ties 
bret ee u nee ‘ ake FE OMA eG ae at 
UWT | Utg.. LEB R AA ; MEJE hens Sa Woe Be A EE cage 2 ARI n Darig- 


(what has coinne nown 1% us 1 ülentelenue ‚'naaded down 10 us’), 


23 


44 Being and Time Int. II 


‘logic’. In the course of this history certain distinctive domains of Being 
have come into view and have served as the primary guides for subsequent 
problematics: the ego cogito of Descartes, the subject, the “I”, reason, 
spirit, person. But these all remain uninterrogated as to their Being and 
its structure, in accordance with the thoroughgoing way in which the 
question of Being has been neglected. It is rather the case that the cate- 
gorial content of the traditional ontology has been carried over to these 
entities with corresponding formalizations and purely negative restric- 
tions, or else dialectic has been called in for the purpose of Interpreting 
the substantiality of the subject ontologically. 

If the question of Being is to: have its own history made transparent, 
then this hardened tradition must be loosened up, and the concealments 
which it has brought about! must be dissolved. We understand this task 
as one in which by taking the question of Being as our clue, we are to destroy 
the traditional content of ancient ontology until we arrive at those prim- 
ordial experiences in which we achieved our first ways of determining the 
nature of Being—the ways which have guided us ever since. 

In thus demonstrating the origin of our basic ontological concepts by 
an investigation in which their ‘birth certificate’ is displayed, we have 
nothing to do with a vicious relativizing of ontological standpoints. But 
this destruction is just as far from having the negative sense of shaking off 
the ontological tradition. We must, on the contrary, stake out the positive 
possibilities of that tradition, and this always means keeping it within its 
limits; these in turn are given factically in the way the question is for- 
mulated at the time, and in the way the possible field for investigation is 
thus bounded off. On its negative side, this destruction does not relate 
itself towards the past; its criticism is aimed at ‘today’ and at the prevalent 
way of treating the history of ontology, whether it is headed towards 
doxography, towards intellectual history, or towards a history of problems. 


destruction; its aim is positive; its negative function remains unexpressed 
and indirect. 

The destruction of the history of ontology is essentially bound up with 
the way the question of Being is formulated, and it is possible only within 
such a formulaticn. In the framework of our treatise, which aims at working 
out that questio: in principle, we can carry out this destruction only with 
regard to stage: of that history which are in principle decisive. 

In line with the positive tencdsucies of this destruction, we must in 
the first instance raise the guesum. whether and to what extent the 


1 


1°. . der durch sie gezeitigten Verdeckungen.’ The verb ‘zeitigen’. will appear fre- 
quently in later chapters. See H. 304 and our note ad loc. 


Inr. II Being and Time 45 


Interpretation of Being and the phenomenon of time have been brought 
together thematically in the course of the history of ontology, and whether 
the problematic of Temporality required for this has ever been worked 
out in principle or ever could have been. The first and only person who 
has gone any stretch of the way towards investigating the dimension of 
Temporality or has even let himself be drawn hither by the coercion of 
the phenomena themselves is Kant. Only when we have established the 
problematic of Temporality, can we succeed in casting light on the 
obscurity of his doctrine of the schematism. But this will also show us 
why this area is one which had to remain closed off to him in its real 
dimensions and its central ontological function. Kant himself was aware 
that he was venturing into an area of obscurity: “This schematism of our 
understanding as regards appearances and their mere form is an art 
hidden in the depths of the human soul, the true devices of which are 
hardly ever to be divined from Nature and laid uncovered before our 
eyes. Here Kant shrinks back, as it were, in the.face of something which 
must be brought to light as a theme and a principle if the expression 
“Being” is to have any. demonstrable meaning. Iu the end, those very 
phenomena which will be exhibited under the heading of “Temporality’ 
in our analysis, are precisely those most covert judgments of the “common 
reason’ for which Kant says it is the ‘business of philasophers’ to provide 
an analytic. 

In pursuing this task of destruction with the problematic of Temporality 
as our clue, we shall try to Interpret the chapter on the schematism and 
the Kantian doctrine of time, taking that chapter as our point of depar- 
ture. At the same time we shall show why Kant could never achieve an 
insight into the problematic of Temporality. There were two things that 
stood in his way: in the first place, he altogether neglected the problem 
of Being; and, in connection with this, he failed to provide an ontology 
with Dasein as its theme or (to put this in Kantian language) to give a 
preliminary ontological analytic of the subjectivity of the subject. Instead 
of this, Kant took over Descartes’ position quite dogmatically, notwith- 
standing all the essential respects in which he had gone beyond him. 
Furthermore, in spite of the fact that he was bringing the phenomenon 
of time back into the subject again, his analysis of it remained oriented 
towards the traditional way in which time had been ordinarily under- 
stood; in the long run this kept him from working out the phenomenon 
of a ‘transcendental determination of time’ in its own structure and func- 
tion. Because of this double effect of tradition the decisive connection 
between time and the ‘J think’ was shrouded in utter darkness; it did not 
even become a problem. 


24 


25 


46 Being and Time - Inr. IT 


In taking over Descartes’ ontological position Kant made an essential 
omission: he failed to provide an ontology of Dasein. This omission was 
a decisive one in the spirit [im Sinne] of Descartes’ ownmost Tendencies. 
With the ‘cogito sum’ Descartes had claimed that he was putting philo- 
sophy on a new and firm footing. But what he left undetermined when he 
began in this ‘radical’ way, was the kind of Being which belongs to the 
res cogitans, or—more precisely—the meaning of the Being of the ‘sum’.1 By 
working out the unexpressed ontological foundations of the ‘cogito sum’, we 
shall complete our sojourn at the second station along the path of our 
destructive retrospect of the history of ontology. Our Interpretation will 
not only prove that Descartes had to neglect thé question of Being alto- 
gether; it will also show why he came to suppose that the absolute ‘Being- 
certain’ [‘‘Gewisssein’’] of the cogifo exempted him from raising the ques- 
tion of the meaning of the Being which this entity possesses. 

Yet Descartes not only continued to neglect this and thus to accept a 
completely indefinite ontological status for the res cogttans sive mens sive 
animus [‘the thing which cognizes, whether it be a mind or spirit’): he 
regarded this entity as a fundamentum inconcussum, and applied the medieval 
ontology to it in carrying through the fundamental considerations of his 
Meditationes. He defined the res cogitans ontologically as an ens; and in the 
medieval ontology the meaning of Being for such an ens had been fixed 
by understanding it as an ens creatum. God, as ens infinitum, was the ens 
increatum. But createdness [Geschaffenheit] in the widest sense of 
something’s. having been produced [Hergestelltheit], was an essential 
item in the structure of the ancient conception of Being. The seemingly 
new beginning which Descartes proposed for philosophizing has revealed 
itself as the implantation of a baleful prejudice, which has kept later 
generations from making any thematic ontological analytic of the ‘mind’ 
{*‘Gemiites”] such as would. take the question of Being as a clue and 
would at the same time come to grips critically with the traditional 
ancient ontology. 

Everyone who is acquainted with the middle ages sees that Descartes is 
‘dependent’ upon medieval scholasticism and employs its terminology. 
But with this ‘discovery’ nothing is achieved philosophically as long as it 
remains obscure to what a profound extent the medieval ontology has 
influenced the way in which posterity has determined or failed to deter- 
mine the ontological character of the res. cogitans. The full extent of this 
cannot be estimated until both the meaning and the limitations of the 
ancient ontology have been exhibited in terms of an orientation directed 

1 We follow the later editions in reading "der Seinssinn des “sum” '. The earlier editions 


have an anacoluthic “den’ for ‘der’. 
t 


Int. II Being and Time : 47 


towards the question of Being. In other words, in our process of destruc- 
tion we find ourselves faced with the task of Interpreting the basis of the 
ancient ontology in the light of the problematic of Temporality. When 
this is done, it will be manifest that the ancient way of interpreting the 
Beine of entities is oriented towards the ‘world’ or ‘Nature’ in the widest 
sensi, and that it is indeed in texts of tme the: ii understanding of 


Beir is ohtz'ried. The outward evidences sor this (to cag! course it is 
mer y Outward evidence} je the tua. ofa aiey of Being as 
Mupevota Or oma, whichis, ules, Ontong. i eruperal terms, 
‘presence’ [Anwesenheit !.! Im tiesar vraspei © ei Being as ‘pre- 


sence’; this means that they #12 urderstoc’ vith reyare io ux Jefinite mode 
of ime—the "Present"? 

The proble:natic of Greek ontology, uk: that of ony other, must take 
its clues from Dasein itself. In both o:diuary and : hiiosophical usage, 
Dasein, man’s Being, is ‘defined’ as the &:.or Acyvov »xov—-as that living 
thing whose Being is essentially determined by the potentiality for dis- 
course.’ Aeyeıv is the clue for arriving at those structures of Being which 
belong to the entities we encounter in addressing ourselves to anything 
or speaking about it [im Ansprechen und Besprechen]. (Cf. Section 7 B.) 
This is why the ancient ontology as developed by Plato turns into ‘dialec- 
tic’. As the ontological clue gets progressively worked out—namely, in 
the ‘hermeneutic’ of the Aéyos—it becomes increasingly possible to grasp 
the problem of Being in a more radical fashion. The ‘dialectic’, which has 
been a genuine philosophical embarrassment, becomes superfluous. That 


1 The noun ovoia is derived from one of the stems used in conjugating the irregular 
verb elva, (‘to be’); in the Aristotelian traditaan it is usually translated as ‘substance’, 
though translators of Plato are more likely to write ‘essence’, ‘existence’, or ‘being’. 
Heidegger suggests that ovaia is to be thought of as synonymous with the derivative 
noun mapovoia (‘being-at’, ‘presence’)..As he points out, mapovola has a close 
etymological correspondence with the German. ‘Anwesenheit’, which is similarly derived 
from the stem of a verb meaning ‘to be’ (Cf. O.H.G. ‘wesan’) and a prefix of the place 
or time at which (‘an-’). We shall in general translate ‘Anwesenheit’ as ‘presence’, and 
the participle ‘anwesend’ as some form of the expression ‘have presence’. 


2 ‘die “Gegenwart” ’. While this noun may, like mapovaia or ‘Anwesenheit’, mean the 
presence of someone at some place or on some occasion, it more often means the present, as 
distinguished from the past and the future. In its etymological root-structure, however, it 
means a waiting-towards. While Heidegger scems to think of all these meanings as somehow 
fused, we shall generally translate this noun as ‘the Present’, reserving ‘in the present’ for 
the corresponding adjective ‘gegenwärtig’. 

3 The phrase {wor Adyov éxov is traditionally translated as ‘rational animal’, on the 
assumption that Aoyos refers to the faculty of reason. Heidegger, however, points out that 
Adyos is derived from the same root as the verb Aéyew (‘to talk’, ‘to hold discourse’); 
he identifies this in turn with voeiv (‘to cognize’, ‘to be aware of’, ‘to know’), and calls 
attention to the fact that the same stem is found in the adjective Sta\exrexds (‘dialectical’). 
(See also H. 165 below.) He thus interprets Adyos as ‘Rede’, which we shall usually 
translate as ‘discourse’ or ‘talk’, depending on the context. See Section 7 B below (H. 
32 ff.) and Sections 34 and 35, where ‘Rede’ will be defined and distinguished both from 
‘Sprache’ (‘language’) and from ‘Gerede’ (‘idle talk’) (H. 160 ff.). 


48 Being and Teme Int. II 


is why Aristotle ‘no longer has any understanding’ of it, for he has put it 
on a more radical footing and raised it to a new level [aufhob]. Acyeır 
itself—or rather weiv, that simple awareness of something present-at- 
hand in its sheer presence-at-hand,! which Parmenides had already taken 
to guide him in his own interpretation of Being—has the Temporal 
structure of a pure ‘making-present’ of something.? Those entities which 
show themselves in this and for it, and which are understood as entities 
in the most authentic sense, thus get interpreted with regard to the 
Present; that is, they are conceived as presence (ovoia).? 

Yet the Greeks have managed to interpret Being in this way without 
any explicit knowledge of the clues which function here, without any 
acquaintance with the fundamental ontological function of time or even 
any understanding of it, and without any insight into the reason why this 
function is possible. On the contrary, they take time itself as one entity 
among other entities, and try to grasp it in the structure of its Being, 
though that way of understanding Being which they have taken as their 
horizon is one which is itself naively and inexplicitly oriented towards 
time. 

Within the framework in which we are about to work out the principles 
of the question of Being, we cannct present a detailed Temporal Inter- 
pretation of the foundations of ancient ontology, particularly not of its 
loftiest and purest scientific stage, which is reached in Aristotle. Instead 
we shall give an interpretation of Aristotle’s essay on time, which may 
be chosen as providing a way of discriminating the basis and the limitations 
of the ancient science of Being. 

Aristotle’s essay on time is the first detailed Interpretation of this 


1‘... von etwas Vorhandenem in seiner puren Vorhandenheit . . > The adjective 
‘vorhanden’ means literally "before the hand’, but this signification has long since given 
way to others. In ordinary German usage it may, for instance, be applied to the stock of 
goods which a dealer has ‘on hand’, or to the ‘extant’ works of an author; and in earlier 
Biere writing it could be used, like the word ‘Dasein’ itself, as a synonym for the 

atin ‘existentia’. Heidegger, however, distinguishes quite sharply between ‘Dasein’ and 
“Vorhandenheit’, using he latter to designate a kind of Being which belongs to things 
other than Dasein. We shall translate ‘vorhanden’ as ‘present-at-hand’, and ‘Vorhanden- 
heit’ as ‘presence-at-hand’. The reader must be careful not to confuse these expressions 
with our ‘presence’ (‘Anwesenheit’) and ‘the Present’ (‘die Gegenwart’), etc., or with a 
few other verbs and adjectives which we may find it convenient to translate by ‘present’. 

2‘... des reinen “Gegenwartigens” von etwas’. The verb ‘gegenwärtigen’, which is 
derived from the adjective ‘gegenwartig’, is not a normal German verb, but was used by 
Husserl and is used extensively by Heidegger. While we shall translate it by various forms 
of ‘make present’, it does not necessarily mean ‘making phvsically present’, but often 
means something like ‘bringing vividly to mind’. 

3 ‘Das Seiende, das sich in ihm für es zeigt und das als das eigentliche Seiende 
verstanden wird, erhält demnach seine Auslegung in Rücksicht auf—Gegen-wart, 
d.h. es ist als Anwesenheit (oola) begrifien.’ The hyphenation of ‘Gegen-wart’ calls 
attention to the structure of this word in a way which cannot be reproduced in English. 
See note 2, p. 47, H. 25 above. The pronouns ‘ihm’ and ‘es’ presumably both refer back 
to Adyew, though their reference is ambiguous, as our version suggests. 


Int. II Being and Time 49 


phenomenon which has come down to us, Every subsequent account of 
time, inciuding Bergson’s, has been essentially determined by it. When we 
analyse the Aristotelian conception, it will hkewise become clear, as we 
go back, that the Kantian account of time operates within the structures 
which Aristotle has set forth; this means that Kant’s basic ontological 
orientation remains that of the Greeks, in spite of all the distinctions which 
arise in a new inquiry. . 

The question of Being does not achieve its true concreteness until we 
have carried through the process of destroying the ontological tradition. 
In this way we can fully prove that the question of the meaning of Being 
is one that we cannot avoid, and we can demonstrate what it raeans to 
talk about ‘restating’ this question. 

In any investigation in this field, where ‘the thing itself is deeply 
veiled’! one must take pains not to overestimate the results. For in 
such an inquiry one is constantly compelled to face the possibility 
of disclosing an even more primordial and more universal horizon 
from which we may draw the answer to the question, “What is 
‘Being?’ We can discuss such possibilities seriously and with positive 
results only if the question of Being has heen reawakened and wc have 
arrived at a field where we can come to terms with it in a way that can 
be controlled. 


€ 7. Tke Phenomenological Method of Investigation 


In provisionally characterizing the object which serves as the theme of 
our investigation (the Being of entities, or the meaning of Being in general), 
it seems that we have also delineated the method to be employed. The task 
of ontology is to explain Being itself and to make the Being of entities 
stand out in full relief. And the method of ontology remains questionable 
in the highest degree as long as we merely consult those ontologies which 
have come down to us historically, or other esszysof that character. Since the 
term ‘‘ontology”’ is used in this investigation in a sense which is formally 
broad, any attempt to clarify the method of ontology by tracing its history 
is automatically ruled out. 

When, moreover, we use the term “‘ontology”’, we are not talking about 
some definite philosophical discipline standing in interconnection with 
the “thers. Here one does not have to measure up to the tasks of some 
discipline that has been presented beforehand; on the contrary, only in 
terms of the objective necessities of definite questions and the kind of 
treatment which the ‘things themselves’ require, can one develop such a 
discipline. 

With the question of the meaning of Being, our investigation comes up 


27 


28 


kad 


50 Being and Time Int. 11 


against the fundamental question of philosophy. This is one that must be 
treated phenomenologically. Thus our treatise does not subscribe to a ‘stand- 
point’ or represent any special ‘direction’; for phenomenology is nothing 
of either sort, nor can it become so as long as it understands itself. The 
expression ‘phenomenology’ signifies primaffly a methodological concep- 
tie» This expiczsion does mot characterize the what of the obiects of 

soi csupinal research as subrcei-matter, but cather the aw o: that 
(rd he more genuinely a methorniogiesi concept ıs word out 
and the more comprehensively it Sn ihe prineipks on which a 
science ‘o be conducted, all the more p: ur dizlly is it rooted in the way 
we come io terms with the things th’: meee and the farther is it 
removed from what we call “technical dsvices”, though there are many 
such devices even in the theoretical disciplines. l 

Thus the te1-n ‘phenomenology’ expresses a maxim which can be for- 
mulated as “to the things themselves!’ it is opposed to all free-floating 
constructions and accidental findings; it is opposed to taking over any 
concepuc™: vhich only seem to have been demonstrated; it is opposed 
to those pseu: do-questions which parade themselves as. ‘problems’, often 
for generations at a time. Yet this maxim, one may rejoin, is abundantly 
self-evident, and it expresses, moreover, the underlying principle of any 


scientific knowledge whatsoever. Why should anything so self-evident be. 


taken up explicitly 3 in Aving a title to a branch of research? In point of 
fact, the issue here is a\kind of ‘self-evidence’ which we should like to 
bring closer to us, so far as itiis important to dq so in casting light upon 
the procedure of our treatise. We shall expound only the preliminary 
conception [Vorbegriff] of phenomenology. 

This. expression has two components: “phenomenon” and “logos”. 
Both of these go back to terms from the Greek: dawöpevov and Adyos. 
Taken superficially, the term “phenomenology” is formed like “theology”, 
“biology”, ““sociology”—-names which may be translated as “science of 
God”, “science of life”, “science of society”. This would make pheno- 
menology the science of phenomena. We shall set forth the preliminary con- 
ception of phenomenology by characterizing what one has in mind in the 
term’s two components, ‘phenomenon’ and ‘logos’, and by establishing 
the meaning of the name in which these are put together. The history of 


1 The appeal to the ‘Sachen selbst’, which Heidegger presents as virtually a slogan for 
Husserl’s phenomenology, is not easy ‘to translate without giving misleading impressions. 
What Husserl has m mind is the ‘things’ that words may be found to signify when their 
significations are correctly intuited by the right kind of Anschauung. (Cf. his: Logische 
Untersuchungen, vol. 2, part ı, second edition, Halle, 1913, p. 6.) We have followed Marvin 
Farber in adopting ‘the things: themselves’. (Cf. his The Foundation of Phenomenology, 
Cambridge, Mass., 1943, pp. 202-3.) The word ‘Sache’ will, of course, be translated in 
other ways also. 


Int. II Being and Time 51 


the word itself, which presumably arose in the Wolffian school, is here of 
no significance. > 
A. The Concept of Phenomenon 

The Greek expression dawopevov, to which the term ‘phenomenon’ 
goes back, is derived from the verb ¢atveo@a, which signifies ‘fto show 
itself”. Thus da:vdjevov means that which shows itself, the manifest [das, 
was sich zeigt, das Sichzeigende, das Offenbare]. $daiveoda: itself is a 
middle-voiced form which comes from ¢aivw—to bring to the light of 
day, to put in the light. Paivw comes from the stem da—, like dds, the 
light, that which is bright—in other words, that wherein something can 
become manifest, visible in itself. Thus we must keep in mind that the expres- 
sion ‘phenomenon’ signifies that which shows itself in itself, the manifest. 
Accordingly the ¢atvoueva or ‘phenomena’ are the totality of what lies 
in the light of day or can be brought to the light—what the Greeks some- 
times identified simply with ra ovra (entities), Now an entity can show 
itself from itself [von ihm selbst her] in many ways, depending in each 
case on the kind of access we have to it. Indeed it is even possible for an 
entity to show itself as something which in itself it is not. When it shows 
itself in this way, it ‘looks like something or other’ [“‘sieht”. . . “so aus 
wie... .”]. This kind of showing-itself is what we call ‘“‘seeming’’ [Scheinen]. 
Thus in Greek too the expression ¢atvoyevoy (“phenomenon”) signifies 
that which looks like something, that which is ‘semblant’, ‘semblance’ 
[das “Scheinbare”, der ‘“‘Schein’’]. Pawopevov ayadov means some- 
thing good which looks like, but ‘in actuality’ is not, what it gives itself 
out to be. If we are to have any further understanding of the concept of 
phenomenon, everything depends on our seeing how what is designated 
in the first signification of dawöpevov (‘phenomenon’ as that which shows 
itself) and what is designated in the second (‘phenomenon as semblance) 
are structurally interconnected. Only when the meaning of something is 
such thatit makes a pretension ofshowing itself—that is, of being a phenome- 
non—tan it show itself as something which it is not; only then can it 
‘merely look like so-and-so’. When ġawópevov signifies ‘semblance’, the 
primordial signification (the phenomenon as the manifest) is already 
included as that upon which the second signification is founded. We shall 
allot the term ‘phenomenon’ to this positive and primordial signification 
of davdpevov, and distinguish “phenomenon” from “semblance”, which 
is the privative modification of “phenomenon” as thus defined. But what 
both these terms express has proximally nothing at all to do with what is 
éalled an ‘appearance’, or still less a ‘mere appearance’.! 


1°. „was man “Erscheinung” oder gar “‘blosse Erscheinung” nennt.’ Though the 
noun ‘Erscheinung’ and the verb ‘erscheinen’ behave so much like the English ‘appear- 
ance’ and ‘appear’ that the ensuing discussion presents relatively few difficulties in this 


29 


52 Being and Time Int. II 


This is what one is talking about when one speaks of the ‘symptoms of 
a disease’ [‘‘Krankheitserscheinungen’’|]. Here one has in mind certain 
occurrences in the body which show themselves and which, in showing 
themselves as thus showing themselves, ‘indicate’ [“indizieren’’] some- 
thing which does not show itself. The emergence [Auftreten] of such 
occurrences, their showing-themselves, goes together with the Being- 
present-at-hand of disturbances which do not show themselves. Thus 
appearance, as the appearance ‘of something’, does not mean showing- 
itself; it means rather the announcing-itself by [von] something which 
does not show itself, but which announces itself through something which 
does. show itself. Appearing is a not-showtng-ttself. But the ‘not’ we find 
here is by no means to be confused with the privative “not? which we 
used in defining the structure of semblance.! What appears does not show 
itself; and anything which thus fails to show itself, is also something which 
can never seem.” All indications, presentations, symptoms, and symbols 
have this basic formal structure of appearing, even though they differ 


among themselves. f 


respect for the translator, the passage shows some signs of hasty construction, and a few 
comments may be helpful. We are told several times that ‘appearance’ and ‘phenome- 
non’ are to be sharply distinguished; yct we are also reminded that there is a sense in 
which they coincide, and even this sense seems to be twofold, though it is not clear that 
Heidegger is fully aware of this. The whole discussion is based upon two further distinc- 
tions: the distinction between ‘showing’ (‘zeigen’) and ‘announcing’ (‘melden’) and 
‘bringing forth’ (‘hervorbringen’), and the distinction between (‘x’) that which ‘shows 
itself’ (‘das Sichzeigende’) or which ‘does the announcing’ (‘das Meldende’) or which 
‘gets brought forth’ (‘das Hervorgebrachte’), and (‘y’) that which ‘announces itself’ 
(‘das Sichmeldende’) or which does the bringing-forth. Heidegger is thus able to intro- 
duce the following senses of ‘Erscheinung’ or ‘appearance’: 

1a. an observable event y, such as a symptom which announces a disease x by showing 

itself, and in or through which x announces itself without showing itself; 

1b. »’s showing-itself; 

2. x’s announcing-itself in or through 7; 
ga. the ‘mere appearance’ y which x may bring forth when x is of such a kind that its 

real nature can never be made manifest; 

gb. the ‘mere appearance’ which is the bringing-forth of a ‘mere appearance’ in sense ga. 
Heidegger makes abundantly clear that sense 2 is the proper sense of ‘appearance’ and 
that senses 3a and 3b are the proper senses of ‘mere appearance’. On H. 30 and 31 he 
concedes that sense 1b corresponds to the primordia] scnse of ‘phenomenon’; but his 
discussion on H, 28 suggests that 1a corresponds to this more accurately, and he reverts 
to this position towards the end of H. 30. 


1‘ .. als welches es die Struktur des Scheins bestimmt.’ (The older editions omit 
the ‘es’.) 

2 ‘Was sich in der Weise nicht zeigt, wie das Erscheinende, kann auch nie scheinen.’ 
This passage is ambiguous, but presumably ‘das Erscheinende’ is to be interpreted as the 
x of our note 1, p. 51, not our y. The reader should notice that our standardized transla- 
tion of ‘scheinen’ as ‘seem’ is one which here becomes rather misleading, even though 
these words correspond fairly well in ordinary usage. In distinguishing between ‘scheinen’ 
and ‘erscheinen’, Heidegger seems to be insisting that ‘scheinen’ can be done only by 
the y which ‘shows itself’ or ‘does the announcing’, not by the x which ‘announces 
itself’ in or through y, even though German usage does not differentiate these verbs quite 
so sharply. 


Int. II Being and Time 53 


In spite of the fact that ‘appearing’ is never a showing-itself in the sense 
of “phenomenon”, appearing is possible only by reason of a showing-ttself 
of something. But this showing-itself, which helps to make possible the 
appearing, is not the appearing itself. Appearing is an announcing-itself [das 
Sich-melden] through something that shows itself. Ifone then says that with 
the word ‘appearance’ we allude to something wherein something appears 
without being itself an appearance, one has not thereby defined the 
concept of phenomenon: one has rather presupposed it. This presupposition, 
however, remains concealed; for when one says this sort of thing about 
‘appearance’, the expression ‘appear’ gets used in two ways. “That 
wherein something ‘appears’ ”” means that wherein something announces 
itself, and therefore does not show itself; and in the words [Rede] ‘without 
being itself an “appearance” ’, “appearance” signifies the showing-itself. 
But this showing-itself belongs essentially to the ‘wherein’ in which some- 
thing announces itself. According to this, phenomena are never appearances, 
though on the other hand every appearance is dependent on phenomena. 
If one defines “phenomenon” with the aid of a conception of ‘appearance’ 
which is still unclear, then everything is stood on its head, and a ‘critique’ 
of phenomenology on this basis is surely a remarkable undertaking. 

So again the expression ‘appearance’ itself can have a double signifi- 
cation: first, appearing, in the sense of announcing-itself, as not-showing- 
itseif; and next, that which does the announcing [das Meldende selbst]— 
that which in its showing-itself indicates something which does not show 
itself. And finally one can use “appearing” as a term for the genuine 
sense of “phenomenon” as showing-itself. If one designates these three 
different things as ‘appearance’, bewilderment is unavoidable. 

But this bewilderment is essentially increased by the fact that ‘appear- 
ance’ can take on still another signification. That which does the announc- 
ing—that which, in its showing-itself, indicates something non-manifest— 
may be taken as that which emerges in what is itself non-manifest, and 
which emanates [ausstrahlt] from it in such a way indeed that the non- 
manifest gets thought of as something that is essentially never manifest. 
When that which does the announcing is taken this way, ‘‘appearance”’ 
is tantamount to a “bringing forth” or “something brought forth”, but 
something which does not make up the real Being of what brings it forth: 
here we have an appearance in the sense of ‘mere appearance’. That 
which does the announcing and is brought forth does, of course, show itself, 
and in such a way that, as an emanation of what it announces, it keeps 
this very thing constantly veiled in itself. On the other hand, this not- 
showing which veils îs not a semblance. Kant uses the term “‘appearance”’ 
in this twofold way. According to him “appearances” are, in the first 


30 


3I 


54 Being and Time Int. Il 
place, the ‘objects of empirical intuition’: they are what shows itself in 
such intuition. But what thus shows itself (the “phenomenon” in the 
genuine primordial sense) is at the same time an ‘appearance’ as an 
emanation of something which hides itself in that appearance—an emana- 
tion which announces. 

In so far as a phenomenon is constitutive for ‘appearance’ in the signi- 
fication of announcing itself through something which shows itself, though 
such a phenomenon can privatively take the variant form of semblance, 
appearance too can become mere semblance. In a certain kind of lighting 
someone can look as if his cheeks were flushed with red; and the redness 
which shows itself can be taken as an announcement of the Being-present- 
at-hand of a fever, which in turn indicates some disturbance in the 
organism. 

“Phenomenon”, the showing-itself-in-itself, signifies a distinctive way in 
which something can be encountered.! ‘Appearance’, on the other hand, 
means a reference-relationship which is in an entity itself,? and which 
is such that what does the referring (or the announcing) can fulfil its possit le 
function only if it shows itself in itself and is thus a ‘phenomenon’, Both 
appearance and semblance are founded upon the phenomenon, though in 
different ways. The bewildering multiplicity of ‘phenomena’ designated 
by the words “phenomenon”, “semblance”, “appearance”, “mere appear- 
ance”, cannot be disentangled unless the concept of the phenomenon is 
understood from the beginning as that which shows itself in itself. 

If in taking the concept of “phenomenon” this way, we leave indefinite 
which entities we consider as ‘‘phenomena’’, and leave it open whether 
what shows itself is an entity or rather some characteristic which an entity 
may have in its Being, then we have merely arrived at the formai concep- 
tion of “phenomenon’’.'If by “that which shows itself” we understand 
those entities which are accessible through the empirical “intuition” in, 
let us say, Kant’s sense, then the formal conception of “phenomenon” 
will indeed be legitimately employed. In this usage ‘‘phenomenon’’ has 
the signification of the ordinary conception of phenomenon. But this 
ordinary conception is not the phenomenological conception. If we keep 
within the horizon of the Kantian problematic, we can give an illustration 
of what is conceived phenomenologically as a “phenomenon”, with 
‘reservations as to other differences; for we may then say that that which 
already shows itself in the appearance as prior to the “phenomenon” as 


1‘... eine ausgezeichnete Begegnisart von etwas.’ The noun ‘Begegnis’ is derived from 
the verb ‘begegnen’, which is discussed in note 2, p. 70, H. 44 below. 
2‘... einen seienden Verweisungsbezug im Setenden selbst... .’ The verb ‘verweisen’, 


which we shall translate as ‘refer’ or ‘assign’, depending upon the context, will receive 
further attention in Section 17 below, See our note 2, p. 97, H. 68 below. 


Int. II Being and Time 55 
ordinarily understood and as accompanying it in every case, dan, even 
though it thus shows itself unthematically, be brought thematically to 
show itself; and what thus shows itself in itself (the ‘forms of the‘intuition’) 
will be the “phenomena” of phenomenology. For manifestly space and 
xne must be able to show themselves in this way—they must be able to 
come phenomena—if Kant is claiming to make a transcendental 
.sertion grounded in the facts when he says that space is the a priori 
"inside-which” of an ordering.: 

If, however, the phenomenological conception of phenomenon is 
to be understood at all, regardless of how much closer we may come 
to determining the nature of that which shows itself, this presupposes 
inevitably that we must have an insight into the meaning of the formal 

onception of phenomenon and its legitimate employment in an 

-rdinary signification.—But before setting up our preliminary con- 
v ption of phenomenology, we must also define the’ signification of 
adyos so as to make clear in what sense phenomenology can be a ‘science 
o phenomena at all. 


B. The Concept of the Logos 
In Plato and Aristotle the concept of the Adyos has many competing 
significations, with no basic signification positively taking the lead. In 


fact, however, this is only a semblance, which will maintain itself as long. 


as our Interpretation is unable to grasp the basic signification properly in 
its primary content. If we say that the basic signification of Adyos is 
“discourse”,? then this word-for-word translation will not be validated 
until we have deterrained what is meant by “‘discourse” itself. The real 
signification of “discourse” ; which is obvious enough, gets corstantly 
covered up by the later history of the word Adyos, and especially by the 
numerous and arbitrary Interpretations which subsequent philosophy has 
provided. Aöyos gets ‘translated’. (and this means that it is always getting 
interpreted) as “reason”, “judgment”, “concept”, ‘definition’, “ground”, 
or “relationship’”’.® But how can ‘discourse’ be so susceptible of modifica- 
tion that Adyos can signify all the things we have listed, and in good 
scholarly usage? Even if Aöyos is understood in the sense of “‘assertion”’, 
but of “assertion” as ‘judgment’ / this seemingly legitimate translation may 
still miss the fundamental signification, especially if “judgment” is con- 
ceived in a sense taken over from some contemporary ‘theory of judgment’. 

Aéyos does not mean “judgment”, and it certainly does not mean this 


1 Cf. Critique of Pure Reason®, ‘Transcendental Aesthetic’, Section 1, P. 34. 
2 On Adyos, ‘Rede’, etc., see note 3, p.Q7, H. 25 above. 
. Vernunft, Urteil, Begriff, Definition, Grund, Verhältnis.’ 


32 


33 


56 Being and Time Int. IJ 


primarily—if one understands by ‘“‘judgment”’ a way of ‘binding’ some- 
thing with something else, or the ‘taking of a stand’ (whether by 
acceptance or by rejection). 

Adyos as ‘discourse’? means rather the same as önAoödv: to make 
manifest what one is ‘talking about’ in one’s discourse.! Aristotle has 
explicated this function of discourse more precisely as åmoģaiveoĝai.tY 
The Adyos lets something be seen ($aiveofa:), namely, what the dis- 
course is about; and it does so either for the one who is doing the talking 
(the medium) or for persons who are talking with one another, as the case 
may be. Discourse ‘lets something be seen’ aró .. .: that is, it lets us 
see something from the very thing which the discourse is about.? In 
discourse (dwégavors), so far as it is genuine, what is said [was geredet 
ist] is drawn from what the talk is about, so that discursive communication, 
in what it says [in ihrem Gesagten], makes manifest what it is talking 
about, and thus makes this accessible to the other party. This is the 
structure of the Adyos as amosarsıs. This mode of making manifest 
in the sense of letting something be seen by pointing it out, does not go 
with all kinds of ‘discourse’. Requesting (edy7), for instance, also makes 
manifest, but in a different way. 

When fully concrete, discoursing (letting something be seen} has the 
character of speaking [Sprechens]-—vocal proclamation in words. The 
Aoyos is fury, and indeed, dw pera dayracias—an utterance in 
which something is sighted in each case. 

And only because the function of the Adyes as Amödersıs ties in 
letting something be seen by pointing it out, can the Aöyaos have the 
structural form of ovvéecis. Here “synthesis? does not mean a binding 
and linking together of representations, a manipulation of psychical 
occurrences where the ‘problem’ arises of how these bindings, as some- 
thing inside, agree with something physical outside. Here the ow has a 
purely apophantical signification and means letting something be seen 
in its togetherness [Betsammen| with something—letting it be seen as some- 
thing. 

Furthermore, because the Adyos is a letting-something-be-seen, it can 
therefore be true or false. But here everything depends on our steering clear 
of any conception of truth which is construed in the sense of ‘agreement’. 
This idea is by no means the primary one in the concept of dA7 Gea. 
The ‘Being-true’ of the Adyos as aAndeseıw means that in Aéyew as 
arogaiveoda: the entities of which one is talking must be taken out of their 
hiddenness; one must let them be seen as something unhidden (dAn@és) ; 


1 : . . offenbar machen das, wovon in der Rede “die Rede” ist.’ 
®‘, .. von dem selbst her, wovon die Rede ist.’ 


Int. IT Being and Time 57 


that is, they must be discovered.! Similarly, ‘Being false’ (sevöcoha:) 
amounts to deceiving in the sense of covering up [verdecken] : putting some- 
thing in front of something (in such a way as to let it be seen) and thereby 
passing it off as something which it is not. 

But because ‘truth’ has this meaning, and because the Adyos is a 
definite mode of letting something be seen, the Adyas is just not the kind of 
thing that can be considered as the primary ‘locus’ of truth. If, as has 
become quite customary nowadays, one defines ‘‘truth”’ as something that 
‘really’ pertains to judgnient,?. and if one then invokes the support of 
Aristotle with this thesis, not only is this unjustified, but, above ail, the 
Greek conception of truth has been misunderstood. Atg@nais, the sheer 
sensory percepticn of something, is ‘true’ im the Greek sense, apd indeed 
more primoriialiy than the Aöyos which we have been discussing. Just 
as seeing aims at colours, any ato@yars aims at its (Sta (those entities 
which are genuinely accessible only ihreugh i: and for it); anc to that 
extent this perception is always truc. Thi: rucar. ihat seeing always 
discovers colours, and hearing always disccvers sovu.ds. Pure voety is 
the perception òf ihe simplest determinate ways or Joma whicr — utes 
as such may pessess, and it perceives them jusi by ceking ai them. 
This voeiv is what is ‘true’ in the purest and most prizaordiai sense; that 
is to say, it merely discovers, and it does so in such a way that it can never 
cover up. This vosiv can never cover up; it can never be false; it can at 
worst remain a non-perceiving, ayvoets, not sufficing for straightforward 
and appropriate access. 

When something no longer takes the form of just letting something be 
seen, but is always harking back to something eise te which ıt points, so 
that it lets something be seen as something, it thus acquires a synthesis- 
structure, and with this it takes over the possibility of covering up.* The 
‘truth of judgments’, however, is mereiy the opposite of :Jus covertng-up, 
a secondary phenomenon of truth, with more than one kind of foundation.’ 
Both realism and idealism have—with equal thoroughness—missed the 
meaning of the Greek conception of truth, in terms of which only the 


1The Greek words for ‘truth’ (ý aAvGea, rò dAnbés) are compounded of the 
privative prefix d- (‘not’) and the verbal stem -Aud- (‘to escape notice’, ‘to be 
concealed’). The truth may thus be looked upon as that which is un-conceated, that 
which gets discovered or uncovered (‘entdeckt’). 

2 ‘Wenn man... Wahrheit als das bestimmt, was “eigentlich” dem Urteil zukommt...’ 

8‘... das schlicht hinsehende Vernehmen der einfachsten Seinsbestimmungen des 
Seienden als solchen.’ 

% ‘Was nicht mehr die Voilzugsform des reinen Sehenlassens hat, sondern je im Auf- 


weisen auf ein anderes rekurriert und so je etwas als etwas schen lässt, das übernimmt mit , 


dieser Synthesisstruktur die Möglichkeit des Verdeckens.’ 

6‘... ein mehrfach fundiertes Phänomen von Wahrheit.’ A ‘secondary’ or ‘founded’ 
phenomenon is one which is based upon something else. The notion of ‘Fundierung’ is 
one which Heidegger has taken over from Husserl. See our note 1, p. 86, on H. 59 below. 


Tor 


uae 
iz 


we 


58 Bang and Time. Int. II 
possibility of something like a “doctrine of ideas’ can be understood as 
philosophical knowledge, 

And because the function of the vos lies in merely letting something 
be seen, in lettino entities be perce : Gm Vernehmenlassen des Seienden], 
Adyos can sign: ; the reason [Veri ~nd because, moreover, Adyos is 
used hot only -ith the sigraäcn of Adyew but also with that cf 
Aeyopevoy (thar hich is exhibi:: . such), and because the latter is 
nothing else ti::n the broxeiye: which, as present-at-hand, already 
lies at the bottom | zum Grunde] of ar: ; ..cocedure of addressing oneself to it or 
discussing it, Adyos qua Aeyöpevov m:¢..ns the ground, the ratio. And finally, 
because Adyos a Aeyduevov can also signify that which, as something to 
which one addresses oneself, becomes visible in its relation to something in 
its ‘relatedness’, 4.4yos acquires the signification of relation and relationship.! 

This Interpretztion of ‘apophantical discourse’ may suffice to clarify 
the primary function of the Adyos. 


C. The Preliminary Conception of Phenomenology 


When we envisage concretely what we have set forth in our Interpreta- 
tion of ‘phenomenon’ and ‘logos’, we are struck by an inner relationship 
between the things meant by these terms. The expression “phenomen- 
ology” may be formulated in Greek as Adyew ra ġalvopeva, where 
A¢yew means dropaivec@a:. Thus “phenomenology” means drodaiveoda: 
rd duurduera—to let that which shows itselfbe seen from itselfin the very way 
in which it shows itself from itself. This is the formal meaning of that branch 
of research which calls itself “phenomenology”. But here we are expressing 
nothing else than the maxim formulated above: “To the things themselves!’ 

Thus the term “phenomenology” is quite different in its meaning from 
expressions such as “theology” and the like. Those terms designate the 


Jorth, recounting, telling a tale, a statement. Thus Adyos as Adyeıw can be thought of 
as the faculty of ‘reason’ (Vermunf) wich makes such activities ible. But Adyos can 
also mean rd A that which is laid out, exhibited, set forth, told); in this sense 


: rechen’); as such it lies ‘at the bottom’ (‘zum 
Grunde’) of what is exhibited or told, and is thus the ‘ground’ or ‘geason’ (‘Grund’) for `, 
telling it. But when something is exhibited or told, it is exhibited in its relatedness (‘in | 
seiner Bezogenheit’); and in this way Myos as Acydpavov comes to stand for just such a ` 
relation or relationship (‘Beziehung und Verbältnis’). The three senses here distinguished 
euch Heide three senses of the Latin ‘ratic’, by which Adyos was traditionally translated , 
th Heidegger explicitly calls attention to only one of these. Notice that ‘Beziehung’ 


it is the underlying subject Laatta 1d berprechen’ to which one addresses oneself and 


-_ (which we translate as ‘relation’) can also be in some contexts where ‘Ansprechen’ 


our ‘addressing oneself”) would be equally appropriate. Notice further that ‘Verhältnis’ 
our ‘relationship"), which is ordinarily a synonym for ‘Beziehung’, can, like Adyos and 
‘ratio’, also refer to the special kind of relationship which one finds in a mathematical 
en uae etymological connection between ‘Vernehmen’ and ‘Vernunft’ should 
noted. 


Int. II Being and Tıme 59 


objects of their respective sciences according to the subject-matter which 
they comprise at the time [in ihrer jeweiligen Sachhaltigkeit]. ‘Phe- 
nomenology’ neither designates the object of its researches, nor charac- 
terizes the subject-matter thus comprised. The word merely informs us of 
the “kow” with which what is to be treated in this science gets exhibited 
and handled. To have a science ‘of’ phenomena means to grasp its objects 
in such a way that everything about them which is up for discussion must be 
treated by exhibiting it directly and demonstrating it directly.1 The 
expression ‘descriptive phenomenology’, which is at bottom tautological, 

has the same meaning. Here “description” does not signify such a pro- 
cedure as we find, let us say, in botanical morphology; the term has rather 
the sense of a prohibition—the avoidance of characterizing anything 
without. such demonstration. The character af this description itself, 
the specific meaning of the Adyos, can be established first of all in 
terms of the ‘thinghood’ [*‘Sachheit’’] of what is to be ‘described’—that 
is to say, of what is to be given scientific definiteness as we encounter it 
phenomenally. The signification of “phenomenon”, as conceived both 
formally 4nd in the ordinary manner, is such that any exhibiting of an 
entity as it shows itself in itself, may be called “phenomenology” with 
formal justification. 

Now what must be taken into account if the formal conception of 
phenomenon is to be deformalized into the phenomenological one, and 
how is this latter to be distinguished from the ordinary conception? What 
is it that phenomenology is to ‘let us see’? What is it that must be called 
a ‘phenomenon’ in a distinctive sense? What is it that by its very essence 


is necessarily the theme whenever we exhibit something exflictily? Mant- 


festly, it is something that proximally and for the most part does not show 
itself at all: it is something that lies Aidden, in contrast to that which 
proximally and for the most part does show itself; but at the same time it 
is something that belongs to what thus shows itself, and it belongs to it so 
essentially as to constitute its meaning and its ground. 
Yet that which remains hidden in an egregious sense, or which relapses 
and gets covered up again, or which shows itself only ‘in disguise’, is not just 
‚this entity or that, but rather the Being of entities, af our previous observa- 
tions have shown. This Being can be covered up so extensively that it 
becomes forgotten and no question arises about it ar about its meaning. 
Thus that which demands that it become a phenomenon, and which 
demands this in a distinctive sense and in terms of its ownmost content as 
a thing, is what phenomenology has taken into its grasp thematically 
as its oe 


. . in direkter Aufweisung und direkter Ausweisung . . .’ 


60 Being and Time Int. II 


Phenomenology is our way of access to what is to be the theme of 
ontology, and it is our way of giving it demonstrative precision. Only as 
phenomenology, is ontology possible. In the phenomenological conception of 
“phenomenon” what one has in mind as that which shows itself is the 
Being of entities, its meaning, its modifications and derivatives.! And this 
showing-itself is not just any showing-itself, nor is it some such thing as 
appearing. Least of all can the Being of entities ever be anything such that 
‘behind it’ stands something else ‘which does not appear’. 

‘Behind’ the phenomena of phenomenology there is essentially nothing 
else; on the other hand, what is to become a phenomenon can be hidden. 
And just because the phenomena are proximally and for the most part 
not given, thereisneed for phenomenology. Covered-up-ness is the counter- 
concept to ‘phenomenon’. 

There are various ways in which phenomena can be covered up. In the 
first place, a phenomenon can be covered up in the sense that it 1s still 
quite undiscovered. It is neither known nor unknown.* Moreover, a 
phenomenon can be buried over [verschiittet]. This means that it has at some 
time been discovered but has deteriorated [verfiel] to the point of getting 
covered up again. This covering-up can become complete; or rather—and 
as a rule—what has been discovered earlier may still be visible, though 
only as a semblance. Yet so much semblance, so much ‘Being’.® This cover- 
ing-up as a ‘disguising’ is both the most frequent and the most dangerous, 
for here the possibilities of deceiving and misleading are especially 
stubborn. Within a ‘system’, perhaps, those structures of Being—and 
their concepts—which are still available but veiled in their indigenous 
character, may claim their rights. For when they have been bound 
together constructively in a system, they present themselves as something 
‘clear’, requiring no further justification, and thus can serve as the point 
of departure for a process of deduction. 

The covering-up itself, whether in the sense of hiddenness, burying- 
over, or disguise, has in turn two possibilities. There are coverings-up 
which are accidental; there are also some which are necessary, grounded 
in what the thing discovered consists in [der Bestandart des Entdeckten]. 
Whenever a phenomenological concept is drawn from primordial sources, 


1 ‘Der phanomenologische Begriff von Phänomen meint als das Sichzeigende das Sein 
des Seienden, seinen Sinn, seine Modifikationen und Derivate.’ 

2 ‘Über seinen Bestand gibt es weder Kenntnis noch Unkenntnis? The earlier editions 
have ‘Erkenntnis’ where the latter ones have ‘Unkenntnis’. The word ‘Bestand’ always 
presents difficulties in Heidegger; here it permits either of two interpretations, which we 
have deliberately steered between: ‘Whether there is any such thing, is neither known nor 
unknown’, and ‘What it comprises is something of which we have neither knowledge 
nor ignorance.’ 


3 “Wieviel Schein jedoch, soviel “Sein”? 


Int. II Being and Time 61 


there ıs a possibility that it may degenerate if communicated in the form 
of an assertion. It gets understood in an empty way and is thus passed 
on, losing its indigenous character, and becoming a free-floating thesis. 
Even in the concrete work of phenomenology itself there lurks the pos- 
sibility that what has been primordially ‘within our grasp’ may become 
hardened so that we can no longer grasp it. And the difficulty of this 
kind of research lies in making it self-critical in a positive sense. 

The way in which Being and its structures are encountered in the mode 
of phenomenon is one which must first of all be wrested from the objects 
of phenomenology. Thus the very point of departure [Ausgang] for our 
analysis requires that it be secured by the proper method, just as much as 
does our access [Zugang] to the phenomenon, or our passage [Durchgang] 
through whatever is prevalently covering it up. The idea of grasping and 
explicating phenomena in a way which is ‘original’ and ‘intuitive’ 
[“originaren” und “intuitiven”] is directly opposed to the naïveté of a 
haphazard, ‘immediate’, and unreflective ‘beholding’. [““Schauen”’}. 

Now that we have delimited our preliminary conception of pheno- 
menology, the terms ‘phenomenal’ and phenomenological’ can also be fixed in 
their signification. That which is given and explicable in the way the 
phenomenon is encountered is called ‘phenomenal’; this is what we have 
in mind when we talk about “phenomenal structures”. Everything which 
belongs to the species of exhibiting and explicating and which goes to 
make up the way of conceiving demanded by this research, is called 
‘phenomenological’. 

Because phenomena, as understood phenomenologically, are never 
anything but what goes to make up Being, while Being is in every case 
the Being of some entity, we must first bring forward the entities them- 
selves if it is our aim that Being should be laid bare; and we must do this 
in the right way. These entities must likewise show themselves with the 
kind of access which genuinely belongs to them. And in this way the 
ordinary conception of phenomenon becomes phenomenologically rele- 
vant. If our analysis is to be authentic, its aim is such that the prior task 
of assuring ourselves ‘phenomenologically’ of that entity which is to serve 
as our example, has already been prescribed as ou: point of departure. 

With regard to its subject-matter, phenomenology is the science of the 
Being of entities—ontology. In explaining the tasks of ontology we found 
it necessary that there should be a fundamental ontology taking as its 
theme that entity which is ontologico-ontically distinctive, Dasein, in 
order to confront the cardinal problem—the question of the meaning of 
Being in general. Our investigation itself will show that the meaning of 
phenomenological description as a method lies in :nterpretation. The Adyos 


37 


62 Being and Time Int. II 


of the phenomenology of Dasein has the character of a éppnvevew, 
through which the authentic meaning of Being, and also those basic 
structures of Being which Dasein itself possesses, are made known to Dasein’s 
understanding of Being. The phenornenology of Dasein is a hermeneutic in 
the primordial signification of this word, where it designates this business 
of interpreting. But to the extent that by uncovering the meaning of Being 
and the basic structures of Dasein in general we may exhibit the horizon 
for any further ontological study of those entities which do not have the 
character of Dasein, this hermeneutic also becomes a ‘hermeneutic’ in the 
sense of working out the conditions on which the possibility of any onto- 
logical investigation depends. And finally, to the extent that Dascin, as 
ari entity with the possibility of existence, has ontological priority over 
every other entity, “hermeneutic”, as an interpretation of Dasein’s Being, 
has the third and specific sense of an analytic of the existentiality of 
existence; and this is the sense which is philosophica!ly primary. Then so 
far as this hermeneutic works out Dasein’s historicality ontologically as 
the ontical condition for the possibility of historiology, it contains the 
rcats of what can be called ‘hermeneutic’ only in a derivative sense: the 
methodolögy of those humane sciences which are historiological in 
character. 

Being, as the basic theme of philosophy, is no class or genus of entities; 
yei it pertains to every entity. Its ‘universality’ is to be sought higher 
un. Being and the structure of Being lie beyond every entity and every 
possibi» «haracter which an entity may possess. Being is the transcendens 
puré and simple.’ And the transcendence of Dasein’s Being is distinctive in 
that it implies the possibilit$ and the necessity of the most radical individua- 
tion. Every disclosure of Being as the transcendens is transcendental knowledge. 
Phenomenological truth (th disclosedness of Being) is veriias transcendentals. 

Ontology and phen2menology are not two distinct philosophical dis- 
ciplines among othets. These terms characterize chilosophy itself with 
regard to its object ard its way of treating that objert. Philosophy ir 
aniversal phenomenolesical ontology, and takes its departure from the 
hermescuac of Dasein, which, as an analytic of sxisteze, has’ made fast 
the guicing-iine for al. philosophical inquiry at the point where it arise: 
and to which it returns. 

The toliowing invest: «ation would have have been possible if the ground 
asd not been prepare. by Edmund Husserl, with whose Logische Unter- 

“uch. sen phenomenolc, ,y first emerged. Our comments on the preliminary 
sone tion of phenomenology have shown that what is essential in it 


* ein und Seinsstruktur li über jedes Seiende and jede mögliche seiende Bestim- 
m: eit eines Seienden hinaus. ist das transcendens schlechthin.’ 


Int. Il Being and Time 63 


does not lie in its actuality as a philosophical ‘movement’ [“Richtung’”). 
Higher than actuality stands possibility. We can understand — 
logy only by seizing upon it as a possibility.” 

With regard to the awkwardness and ‘inelegance’ of expression in the 
analyses to come, we may remark that it is one thing to give a report 
in which we tell about entities, but another tu grasp entities in their Being. 
For the latter task we lack not only most of the words but, above all, the 
‘grammar’. If we may allude to some earlier researchers on the analysis 
of Being, incomparable on their own level, we may compare the onto- 
logical sections of Plato’s Parmenides or the fourth chapter of the seventh 
book of Aristotle’s Metaphystcs with a narrative section from Thucydides; 
we can then see the altogether unprecedented character of those formula- 
tions which were imposed upon the Greeks by their philosophers. And 
where our powers are essentially weaker, and where moreover the area 
of Being to be disclosed is ontologically far more difficult than that which 
was presented to the Greeks, the harshness of our expression will be 
enhanced, and so will the minutencss of detail with which our concepts 
are formed. 


€ 8. Design cf th: Treaitse 


The question of the meaning of Being is the mest universal and the 
euiutiest of questions, but at the same time it is possible to individualize 
it very precisely for any particular Dasein. If we are to arrive at the basic 
concept of ‘Being’ and to outline the ontological conceptions which it 
requires and the variations which it necessarily undergces, we need a clue 
which is concrete. We shall proceed towards the concept of Being by way 
of an Interpretation of a certain special entity, Dasein, in which we 
shall arrive at the horizon for the understanding of Being and for the 
possibility of interpreting it; the universality of the concept of Being is 
not belied by the relatively ‘special’ character of our investigation. 
But this very entity, Dasein, is in itself ‘historical’, so that its own- 
most ontological elucidaticn necessarily becomes an ‘historiological’ 
Interpretation. 

Accordingly our treatment of the question of Being branches out into 
two distinct tasks, and our treatise will thus have two parts: 


Pari One: the Interpretation of Dasein in terms of temporality, and the 


explication of time as the transcendental horizon for the question of 


Being. 
Part Two: basic features of a phenomenological destruction of the 
history of ontology, with the problematic of Temporality as our clue. 


39 


64 Being and Time Int. II 
Part One has three divisions . 
I. the preparatory fundamental analysıs of Dasein; 
2. Dasein and temporality; k 
3. time and Being.! 


Part Two likewise has three divisions :1 

1. Kant’s doctrine of schematism and time, as a preliminary stage in 
a problematic of Temporality ; 

2. the ontological foundation of Descartes’ ‘cogito sum’, and how the 
medieval ontology has been taken over into the problematic of the 
‘res cogitans’ ; 

3. Aristotle’s essay on time, as providing a way of discriminating 
the phenomenal basis and the limits of ancient ontology. 


1 Part Two and the third division of Part One have never appeared. 


PART ONE 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DASEIN IN TERMS 
OF TEMPORALITY, AND THE EXPLICATION 
OF TIME AS THE TRANSCENDENTAL 
HORIZON FOR THE QUESTION OF BEING 


DIVISION ONE 


PREPARATORY FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS 
OF DASEIN 


In the question about the meaning of Being, what is primarily interrog- 
ated is those entities which have the character of Dasein. The preparatory 
existential analytic of Dasein must, in accordance with its peculiar charac- 
ter, be expounded in outline, and distinguished from other kinds of 
investigation which seem to run parallel] (Chapter 1.) Adhering to the 
procedure which we have fixed upon for starting our investigation, we 
must lay bare a fundamental] structure in Dasein: Being-in-the-world 
(Chapter 2). In the interpretation of Dasein, this structure is something 
‘a prior’; it is not pieced together, but is primordially and constantly a 
whole. It affords us, however, various ways of looking at the items which 
are constitutive for it. The whole of this structure always comes first; but 
if we keen this constantly in view, the-c items, as phenoniena, will be 
mac.’ to stand out. And thus we shall have as objects for ar alysis: the 
wori.: in =s worldhood (Chapter 3), Being-in-the-world as Being-with and 
Beir -or ';-Self (Chapter 4), and B:.1,;-ın as such (Chapter 5). By 
ana} sis this fundamental] «tructure, .:: Being of Dasein can be indic- 
atec ro vonally. Tt. exister:ial meat: . is care (Chapter b}. 


This page is left blank intentionally. 


I 


EXPOSITION OF THE TASK OF A PREPARATORY 
ANALYSIS OF DASEIN 


€ 9. The Theme of the Analytic of Dasein 


WE are ourselves the entities to be analysed. The Being of any such entity 
is in each case mine.! These entities, in their Being, comport themselves 
towards their Being. As entities with such Being, they are delivered over 
to their own Being.? Being is that which is an issue for every such entity.? 
This way of characterizing, Dasein has a double consequence: 

1. The ‘essence’ [Wesen] of this entity lies in its “to be” [Zu-sein]. Its 
Being-what-it-is [Was-sein] (essentia) must, so far as we can speak of it at 
all, be conceived in terms of its Being (extstenta). But here our ontological 
task is to show that when we choose to designate the Being of this entity 
as “existence” [Existenz], this term does not and cannot have the onto- 
logical signification of the traditional term “existentia”; ontologically, 
evistentia is tantamount to Being-present-at-hand, a kind of Being which is 
essentially inappropriate to entities of Dasein’s character. To avoid 
getting bewildered, we shall always use the Interpretative expression 
““hresence-at-hand” for the term “existentia”, while the term “‘existence”’, as 
a designation of Being, will be allotted solely to Dasein. 

The essence of Dasein lies in its existence. Accordingly those characteristics 
which can be exhibited in this entity are not ‘properties’ present-at-hand 
of some entity which ‘looks’ so and so and is itself present-at-hand; 
they are in each case possible ways for it to be, and no more than that, 
All the Being-as-it-is [So-sein] which this entity possesses is primarily 
Being. So when we designate this eatity with the term ‘Dasein’, we are 
expressing not its “what” (as if it were a table, house or tree) but its Being. 

a. That Being which is an issue for this entity in its very Being, is in 
each case mine. Thus Dasein is never to be taken ontologically as an 


1 ‘Das Seiende, dessen Analyse zur Aufgabe steht, sind wir je selbst. Das Sein dieses 
Scienden ist je meines.’ The reader must not get the impression that there is anything 
solipsistic about the second of these sentences. The point $ merely that the kind of Being 
which belongs to Dasein is of a sort which any of us may call his own. 

2 “Als Seiendes dieses Seins ist es seinem ‚genen in tiberantwortet." The earlier 
editions read ‘. . . seinem hang Zu-sein ...’ 

8 See note 2, p. 28, H. 8 above. 


43 


J. ı 


instance or special case of somc genus of entities as things that are 
present-at-hand.! To entities such as these, their Being is ‘a matter of 
indifference’ ;? or more precisely, they ‘are’ such that their Being can be 
neither a matter of indifference to them, nor the opposite. Because 
Dasein has in each case mineness [Jemeinigkeit), one must always use a 
personal pronoun when one addresses it: ‘I am’, ‘you are’. 

Furthermore, in each case Dasein is mine to be in one way or another. 
Dasein has always made some sort of decision as to the way in which it is 
in each case mine [je meines]. That entity which in its Being has this very 
Being as an issue, comports itself towards its Being as its ownmost pos- 
sibility. In each case Dasein is its possibility, and it ‘has’ this possibility, 
but not just as a property [eigenschaftlich], as something present-at-hand 
would. And because Dasein is in each case essentially its own possibility, 
it can, in its very Being, ‘choose’ itself and win itself; it can also lose itself 
ənd never win itself; or only ‘seem’ to do so. But only in so far as it is 
essentially something which can be authentic—that is, something of its own® 
—can it have lostitself and not yet won itself. As modesof Being, authenticity 
and tnauthenticity (these expressions have been chosen terminologically in a 
strict sense) are both grounded in the fact that any Dasein whatsoever is 
characterized by mineness.* But the inauthenticity of Dasein does not signify 
any ‘less’ Being or any ‘lower’ degree of Being. Rather it is the case that 
even in its fullest concretion Dasein can be characterized by inauthenticity 
—when busy, when excited, when interested, when ready for enjoyment. 

The two characteristics of Dasein which we have sketched—the 
priority of ‘existentia’ over essentia, and the fact that Dasein is in each case 
mine {die Jemeinigkeit)—have already indicated that in the analytic of 
this entity we are facing a peculiar phenomenal domain. Dasein does not 
have the kind of Being which belongs to something merely present-at- 
hand within the world, nor does it ever have it. So neither is it to be 
presented thematically as something we come across in the same way as 


62 Being and Time 


1... als Vorhandenem’. The earlier editions have the adjective ‘vorhandenem’ 
instead of the substantive. 


2 ‘gleichgültig’. This adjective must be distinguished from the German adjective 
‘indifferent’, though they might both ordinarily be translated by the English indifferent’, 
which we shall reserve exclusively for the former. In most passages, the latter is best 
translated by ‘undiiferentiated’ or ‘without further differentiation’; occasionally, how- 
ever, it seems preferable to translate it by ‘Indifferent’ with an initial capital. We shall 
follow similar conventions with the nouns ‘Gleichgültigkeit’ and ‘Indifferenz’. 


8 “Und weil Dasein wesenlaft je seine Möglichkeit ist, kann dieses Sciende in seinem 
Sein sich selbst “wählen”, gewinucn, es kann sich verlieren, bzw. nie und nur “scheinbar” 
gewinnen. Vevioren habenkann «s sich nur und noch nicht sich gewonnen haben kann es 
nur, sofern cs .cinem Wesen nach mögliches eigentliches, das heisst sich zueigen ist.’ 
Older editions hive ‘je wesenhaft’ and ‘zueigenes’. The connection between ‘eigentlich’ 
(‘authentic’, ‘rval’) and ‘eigen’ (‘own’) is lost in translation. 

4°... dass Dasein überhaupt durch Jemeinigkeit bestimmt ist.’ 


I. 1 Being and Time 69 


we come across what is present-at-hand. The right way of presenting it is 
so far from self-evident that to determine what form it shall take, is itself 
an essential part of the ontological analytic of thistentity. Only by pre- 
senting this entity in the right way can we have any understanding of its 
Being. No matter how provisional our analysis may be, it always requires 
the assurance that we have started correctly. 

In determining itself as an entity, Dasein always does so in the light of 
a possibility which it ts itself and which, in its very Being, it somehow 
understands. This is the formal meaning of Dascin’s existential constitu- 
tion. But this tells us that if we are to Interpret this entity ontologically, the 
problematic of its Being must be developed from the existentiality of its 
existence. This cannot mean, however, that “Dasein” is to be construed 
in terms of some concrete possible idea of existence. At the outset of our 
analysis it is particularly important that Dasein should not be Interpreted 
with the differentiated character [Differenz] of some definite way of 
existing, but that it should be uncovered [aufgedeckt] in the undiffer- 
entiated character which it has proximally and for the most part. This 
undifferentiated character of Dasein’s everydayness is not nothing, but a 
positive phenomenal characteristic of this entity. Out of this kind of Being 
—and back into it again—is all existing, such as it is.! We call this every- 
day undifferentiated character of Dasein “‘averageness” [Durchschnittlichkeit]. 

And because this average everydayness makes up what is ontically 
proximal for this entity, it has again and again been passed over in expli- 
cating Dasein. That which is ontically closest and well known, is onto- 
logically the farthest and not known at all; and its ontological signification 
is constantly overlooked. When Augustine asks: “Quid autem propinquius 
meipso mihi?” and must answer: “ego certe laboro hic et laboro in meipso: 
factus sum mihi terra difficultatis et sudoris nimii”,! this applies not only to the 
ontical and pre-ontological opaqueness of Dasein but even more to the 
ontological task which lies ahead; for not only must this entity not be 
missed in that kind of Being in which it is phenomenally closest, but it 
must be made accessible by a positive characterization. 

Dasein’s average everydayness, however, is not to be taken as a mere 
‘aspect’. Here too, and even in the mode of inauthenticity, ine structure 
of existentiality lies a priori. And here too Dasein’s Being is an issue for it 
in a definite way; and Dasein comports itself towards it in the mode of 
average everydayness, even if this is only the mode of fleeing in the face 
of it and forgetfulness thereof.” 


1 ‘Aus dieser Seinsart heraus und in sie zurück ist alles Existieren, wie est ist.’ 

2 ‘Auch in ihr geht es dem Dasein in bestimmter Weise um sein Sein, zu dem es sich 
im Modus der durchschnittlichen Alltaglichkeit verhält und set es auch nur im Modus 
der Flucht davor und des Vergessens seiner.’ For further discussion, see Section 40 below, 


44 


45 


70 Being and Time I. | 


But the explication of Dasein in its average everydayness does not give 
us just average structures in the sense of a hazy indefiniteness. Anything 
which, taken ontically, is in an average way, can be very well grasped 
ontologically in pregnant structures which may be structurally indistin- 
guishable from certain ontological characteristics [Bestimmungen] of an 
authentic Being of Dasein. | 

All explicata to which the analytic of Dasein gives rise are obtained by 
considering Dasein’s existence-structyre. Because Dasein’s characters of 
Being are defined in terms of existentiälity, we call them“extstentialia” 
These are to be sharply distinguished from what we call “categories” — 
characteristics of Being for entities whose character is not that of Dasein.! 
Here we are taking the expression ‘category” in its primary ontological 
signification, and abiding by it. In, the ontology of the ancients, the entities 
we encounter within the world? : are taken as the basic examples for the 
interpretation of Being. Noeiv (or the Adyos, as the case may be) is 
accepted as a way of access to them.® Entities are encountered therein. 
But the Being of these entities must be something which can be grasped 
in a distinctive kind of Adyew (letting something be seen), so that this 
Being becomes intelligible in advance. as that which it is—and as that 
which it is already in every entity. In any discussion (Adyos) of entities, 

we have previously addressed ourselves to Being; this addressing is 
karmyopeloda,.* This signifies, in the first instance, making a public 
accusation, taking someone to task for something in the presence of every- 
one. When used ontologically, this term means taking an entity to task, 
as it were, for whatever it is as an entity—that i is to say, letting everyone 
see it in its Being. The karıyopfas. ‚are what is sighted and what is visible 
in such a seeing.® They include: the, yarious ways in which the nature of 
those entities which can be addressed and discussed in a Adyos may be 
1 ‘Weil sie sich aus der Existenzialitie bestimmen, nennen wir die Seinscharaktere des 
Daseins Existenzialien. Sie sind scharf zu trennen von den Seinsbestimmungen des nicht 
daseinimiigen Seienden, die wir Kategorien nennen.' 
. das innerhalb der Welt mende Seiende.’ More literally: ‘the entity that 
encounters within the world.’ While Heidegger normally uses the verb ‘begegnen’ in this 
active intransitive sense, a similar truction with the English ‘encounter’ is unjdio- 


matic and harsh, We shall as a rule either a passive construction (as in ‘entities en- 
countered’) or an active transitive construction (as in ‘entities we encounter’). 


3 ‘Als Z zu ihm gilt das vosjy bzw. der Adyos.’ Here we follow the reading 
of the earlier editions. In thet later ditions; "Zugangsart', which is used rather often, is 
here replaced by 'Z rt’, which ocenre very seldom and is perhaps a misprint. This 


later version nt translated as; folows:- ‘vocir (or the Adyos, as the case may be) 
is accepted as eee or e eaters: ne 
above, especially H. 32-94. 


4 ‘Das je schon pre des Seins im Besprechen A des Senden 
a a yorpängige Ansprodig d p (Adyos) 


ë ‘Das i in solchem Sehen Gesichtete a Sjchtbare . .” On ‘Sehen’ and ‘Sicht’ see H. - 


147. 


Yor Being and Time | 71 


determined a priori. Existentialia and categories are the two. basic pos- 
sibilities for characters of Being. The entities which corresppnd to them 
require different kinds of primary interro:tion respectively? any entity 


is either a “who” (existences or a ihat’? {w ncr-at-hand in the broadest 
sense‘. ib” commection be ween wur, vo hotes of the characters of 
Being e m os be handlet atil ib: ibo ` 7u qeeation of Being has 
Leni aa 

In nur... wiactton we’ ~ akeas vats that in the existential 
analytic ©! Dasein we alse cake heacdiv : with a task which is hardly 
less pressiz than that of tk“ question - sing itself—the task of laying 


bare that a priori basis which ust be vis: 5: befure the question of ‘what 
man is’ can be discussed philosophically. í ise existential analytic of Dase’ . 
comes before any psychology or withrop.uiogy, and certainty "eio.ı any 
biology. While these too are ways in which Dasein cen be investigated, we 
can define the theme of our ane'ytic with greater precision if we dis- 
tinguish it from these. And at the 61:12 time the necessity of that analytic 
can thus be proved more incisiveir. 


{ zo. How the Analytic of Dasein ts to be Distinguished from Anthropology, 
Psychology, and Biology 

After a theme for investigation has been initially outlined in positive 
terms, it is always important to show what is to be ruled out, although it 
can easily hecome fruitless to discuss what is not going to happen. We must 
show that those investigations and formulations of the question which have 
been aimed at Dasein heretofore, have missed the real philosophical pro- 
blem (notwithstanding their objective fertility), and that as long as they 
persist in missing it, they have no right to claim that they can accomplish 
that for which they are basically striving. In distinguishing the existential 
analytic from anthropology, psychology, and biology, we shall confine 
ourselves to what is in principle the ontological question. Our distinctions 
will necessarily be inadequate from the standpoint of ‘scientific theory’ 
simply because the scientific structure of the above-mentioned disciplines 
(not, indeed, the ‘scientific attitude’ of those who work to advance them) 
is today thoroughly questionable and. needs to be attacked in new ways 
which must have their source in ontological problematics. 

Historiologically, the aim of the existential analytic can be made 
plainer by considering Descartes, who is credited with providing the point 
of departure for modern philosophical inquiry by his discovery of the 
“cogito, sum”. He investigates the “cogitare” of the “ego”, at least within 
certain limits. On the other hand, he leaves the “sum” completely undis- 
cussed, even though it is regarded as no less primordial than the cogito. Our 


AP 
m 


46 


47 


72 Being and Time I. ı 


analytic raises the ontological question of the Being of the “sum”. Not until 
the nature of this Being has been determined can we grasp the kind of 
Being which belongs to cogitationes. 

At the same time it is of course misleading to exemplify the aim of our 
analytic historiologically in this way. One of our first tasks will be to 
prove that if we posit an “I” or subject as that which is proximally given, 
we shall completely miss the phenomenal content [Bestand] of Dasein. 


‚Ontologically, every idea of a ‘subject’—unless refined by a previous onto- 


logical determination of its basic character—still posits the subjectum 
(vroxeiuevov) along with it, no matter how vigorous one’s ontical 
protestations against the ‘soul substance’ or the ‘reification of conscious- 
ness’. The Thinghood itself which such reification implies must have its 
ontological origin demonstrated if we are to be in a position to ask what 
we are to understand positively when we think of the unreified Being of 
the subject, the soul, the consciousness, the spirit, the person. All these 
terms refer to definite phenomenal domains which can be ‘given form’ 
{‘‘ausformbare’’|: but they are never used without a notable failure to 
see the need for inquiring about the Being of the entities thus designated. 
So we are not being terminologically arbitrary when we avoid these 
terms—or such expressions as ‘life’ and “‘man’—in designating those 
entities which we are ourselves. 

On the other hand, if we wridlerstand it rightly, in any serious and 
scientifically-minded ‘philosophy of life? (this expression says about as 
much as “the botany of plants”) "there lies an unexpressed tendency 
towards an understanding of Dasein’s Being. What is conspicuous in such 
a philosophy {and here it is defective in principle) is that here ‘life’ itself 
as a kind of Being does not beconie ontologically a problem. 

The researches of Wilhclm Dilthey were stimulated by the perennial 
question of ‘life’. Starting from ‘life’ itself as a whole, he tried to under- 
stand its ‘Experiences’! in their structural and developmental inter-connec- 
tions. His ‘geistesunssenschaftliche Psychologie’ is one which no longer seeks 
to be oriented towards psychical elements and atoms or to piece the life 
of the soul together, but aims rather at ‘Gestalten’ and ‘life as a whole’. 
Its philosophical relevance, however, is not to be sought here, but rather 
in the fact that in all this he was, above all, on his way towards the question 
of ‘life’. To be sure, we can also see here very plainly how limited were 
both his problematic and the set of concepts with which it had to be put 


1 ‘Die “Erlebnisse” dieses “Lebens” . . 2 The connection between ‘Leben’ (‘life’) 
and ‘Erlebnisse’ (‘Experiences’) is lost in translation. An ‘Erlebnis’ is not just any 
‘experience’ (‘Erfahrung’), but one which we feel deeply and ‘live through’. We shall 
translate ‘Erlebnis’ and ‘erleben’ by ‘Experience’ with a capital ‘E’, reserving ‘experience’ 
for ‘Erfahrung’ and ‘erfahren’, 


Iı Being and Time 73 


into words. These limitations, however, are found not only in Dilthey and 
Bergson but in ail the ‘personalitic’ movements to which they have given 
direction and in every tendency towards a philosophical anthropology. 
The phenomenclogical Interpretation of personality is in principle more 
radical and more transparent; but the question of the Being of Dasein 
has a dimension which this too fails to enter. No matter how much 
Husserl! and Scheler may differ in their respective inquiries, in their 
methods of conducting them, and in their orientations towards the world 
as a whole, they are fully in agreement on the negative side of their 
Interpretations of personality. The question of ‘personal Being’ itself is 
one which they no longer raise. We have chosen Scheler’s Interpretation 
as an example, not only because it is accessible in print,!!1 but because he 
emphasizes personal Being explicitly as such, and tries to determine its 
character by defining the specific Being of acts as contrasted with any- 
thing ‘psychical’. For Scheler, the person is never to be thought of as a 
Thing or a substance; the person ‘is rather the unity of living-through 
[Er-lebens] which is immediately experienced in and with our Exper- 
iences—not a ‘Thing merely thought of behind and outside what is immed- 
iately Experienced’.iv The person is no Thinglike and substantial Being. 
Nor can the Being of a person be entirely absorbed in being a subject of 
rational acts which follow certain laws. 

The person is not a Thing, not a substance, not an object. Here Scheler 


is emphasizing what HusserlY suggests when he insists that the unity of ’ 


the person must have a Constitution essentially different from that 
required for the unity of Things of Nature.! What Scheler says of the 


person, he applies to acts as well: “But an act is never also an object; for 


it is essential to the Being of acts that they are Experienced only in their 
performance itself and given in reflection.’Y! Acts are something non- 
psychical. Essentially the person exists only in the performance of inten- 
tional acts, and is therefore essentially not an object. Any psychical 
Objectification of acts, and hence any way of taking them as something 
psychical, is tantamount to depersonalization. A person is in any case 
given as a performer of intentional acts which are bound together by the 
unity of a meaning. Thus psychical Being has nothing to do with personal 
Being. Acts get performed; the person is a performer of acts. What, how- 
ever, is the ontological meaning of ‘performance’? How is the kind of 
Being which belongs to a person to be ascertained ontologically in a 


positive way ? But the critical question cannot stop here. It must face the - 


Being of the whole man, who is customarily taken as a unity of body, 


1‘ .. wenn er für die Einheit der Person eine wesentlich andere Konstitution fordert 
als für die der Naturdinge.’ The second ‘der’ appears in the later editions only. 


48 


49 


74 Being and Time I. ı 


soul, and spirit. In their turn “body”, “soul”, and “spirit” may designate 
phenomenal domains which can be detached as themes for definite 
i:vestigations; within certain limits their ontological indefiniteness may 
ot he ımrortant. When, however, we come to the question of man’s 


th... not something we “ar amply ro:zputet by adding togethe: 
‘: of Being which bedy. cuu and «sirit réspecuvely pussess-— 
< g whose nature has c: ss yet neon determined, And even 


0 cuki attempt such an onte: gical :ordure, some idea of ine 
$o ze. whole must be presuppes. 7. Bui what stands in the way of the 


paste. «os -n of Dasein’s Being (or lcads it ctf the track) is an orientation | 
ihor:  swioured by the anthropology of Christianity and the ancient 
worl} = se inadequate ontologica: foundations have been overlooked 
math cy philosophy of life and by personalism. There are two important 


viemes.ts a this traditional anthropology: 

t. Siau’ is here defined as a fav Adyov éxov, and this is Interpreted 
10 yatan ar animal rationale, something living which has reason. But the 
kind oi Being which belongs to a ¢@ow is understcod in the sense: of 
occurring and Being-present-at-hand. The Aöyos is some superior endow- 
ment; the kind of Being which belongs to it, however, remains quite as 
obscure as that of the entire entity thus compounded. 

2. The second clue for determining the nature of man’s Being and 
essence is a theological one xal elmev ó Oeds. morjowpev dvOpwrov Kar’ 
eixdva Tiuerdpav. xal xa’ cpotwow—‘faciamus hominem ad imaginem 
nostram et similitudinem” Yi With this as its point of departure, 


‚the anthropology of Christian theology, taking with it the ancient 


definition, arrives at an interpretation of that entity which we call 
“man”. But just as the Being of "God gets Interpreted ontologically 
by means of the ancient ontology, so does the Being of the ens finitum, and 
to an even greater extent. In modern times the Christian definition has 
been deprived of its theological character. But the idea of ‘transcendence’ 
—that man is something that reaches beyorid himself—is rooted in Chris- 
tian dogmatics, which can hardly be said to have made an ontological 
problem of man’s Being. The idea of transcendence, according ta which 
man is more than a mere something endowed with intelligence, has 
worked itself out with different variations. The following quotations will 
filustrate how these have originated: ‘Hts praeclaris dotibus excelluit prima 


- . hominis conditio, ut ratio, intelligentia, prudentia, judicium non modo ad terrenae 
. pitoe gubernationem suppeterent, sed quibus transcenderet usque ad Deum 
ef aeternam felicifatem 11 ‘Denn dass der mensch sinufsehen hat uf Gott und 


1 Reading ‘errechnet’. The earliest editions have ‘verrechnet’, with the correct reading 
‚provided i in & list of errata. 


~ 


t 


L ı Being and Time T 


sin wort, zeigt er klarlich an, dass er nack siner natur etwas Gott näher anerborn, 
etwas mee nachschlägt, etwas zuzugs zu im hat, das alles on zwyfel 
darus flüsst, dass er nach dem bil dn u s Gottes geschaffen ist’,'= | 

The two sources which are relevant for the traditional anthropology— 
the Greek definition and the clue which theology has provided—indicate 
that over and above the attempt to determine the essence of ‘man’ as an 
entity, the question of his Being has remained forgotten, and that this 
Being is rather conceived as something obvious or ‘self-evident’ in the 
sense of the Being-present-at-hand of other created Things. Tpese two clues 
become intertwined in the anthropology of modern times, where the res 
cogitans, consciousness, and the interconnectedness of Experience serve as 
the point of departure for methodical study. But since even the cogitationes 
are either left ontological y undetermined, or get tacitly assumed as 
something ‘self-evidently’ ‘given’ whose ‘Being’ is not to be questioned, 
the decisive ontological foundations of anthropological pro a 
remain undetermined. f 

This is no less true of ‘psychology’, whose anthropological tendencies are 
today unmistakable. Nor can we compensate for the absence of onto- 
logical foundations by taking anthropology and psychology and building 
them into the framework of.a gengggl | biology. In the order which any 
possible comprehension and interpretation must follow, biology as a 
‘science of life’ is founded upon the ontology of Dasein, even if not entirely. 
Life, in its own right, is a kind.of Being; but essentially it is accessible only 
in Dasein. Thé ontology of life is accomplished by way of a privative 
Interpretation; it determines. what must be the case if there oan be any- 
thing like mere-aliveness [Nur-noch-leben]. Life is not a mere Being- 
present-at-hand, nor is it Dasein. In turn, Dasein is never to be defined 
ontologically by regarding it as life (in an ontologically indefinite manner) 
plus- something else. 

In suggesting that anthropology, yalen and biology all fail to 
give an unequivocal and ontologically adequate answer to the question 
about the kind of Being which belongs to those entities which we ourselves 
are, we are not passing judgment on the positive work of these disciplines. 
We must always bear in mind, however, that these ontological foundations 
can never be disclosed by subsequent hypotheses derived from empirical 
material, but that they are. always ‘there’ already, even when that 
empirical material simply gets collected. If positive research ‘fails to see 
these foundations and holds. them to be self-evident, this by no means 
proves that they are not basic or that they are not problematic in a more 
radical sense than any thesis of positive science can ever be. 


50 


KI 


52 


76 Being and Time I. r 


T 11. The Existential Analytic and the Interpretation of Primitive Dasein. The 
Difficulties of Achieving a ‘Natural Conception of the World’ 

The Interpretation of Dasein in its everydayness, however, is not 
identical with the describing of some primitive stage of Dasein with 
which we can become acquainted empirically through the medium of 
anthropology. Everydayness does not coincide with primitiveness, but is rather a 
mode of Dasein’s Being, even when that Dasein is active in a highly 
developed and differentiated culture—and precisely then. Moreover, 
even primitive Dasein has possibilities of a Being which is not of the 
everyday kind, and it has a specific everydayness of its own. To orient the 
analysis of Dasein towards the ‘life of primitive peoples’ can have positive 
significance [Bedeutung] as a method because ‘primitive phenomena’ 
are often less concealed and less complicated by extensive self-interpreta- 
tion on the part of the Dasein in question. Primitive Dasein often speaks 
to us more directly in terms of a primordial absorption in ‘phenomena’ 
(taken in a pre-phenomenological sense). A way of conceiving things 
which seems, perhaps, rather clumsy and crude from our standpoint, can 
be positively helpful in bringing out the ontological structures of phe- 
nomena in a genuine way. 

But heretofore our information about primitives has been provided by 
ethnology. And ethnology operates with definite preliminary conceptions 
and interpretations of human Dasein in general, even in first ‘receiving’ 
its material, and in sifting it and working it up. Whether the everyday 
psychology or even the scientific psychology and sociology which the 
ethnologist brings with him can provide any scientific assurance that we 
can have proper access to the phenomena we are studying, and can inter- 
pret them and transmit them in the right way, has not yet been established. 
Here too we are confronted with the same state of affairs as in the other 
disciplines we have discussed. Ethnology itself already presupposes as its 
clue an inadequate analytic of Dasein. But since the positive sciences neither 
‘can’ nor should wait for the ontological labours of philosophy to be done, 
the further course of research will not take the form of an ‘advance’ but 
will be accomplished by recapitulating what has already been ontically dis- 
covered, and by purifying it in a way which is ontologically more trans- 
parent.*! 

No matter how easy it may be to show how ontological problematics 
differ formally from ontical research there are still difficulties in carrying 
out an existential analytic, especially in making a start. This task includes 
a destderatum which philosophy has long found disturbing but has con- 
tinually refused to achieve: to work out the idea of a ‘natural conception of the 
world’, The rich store of information now available as to the most exotic 


I. ı Being and Time 77 


and manifold cultures and forms of Dasein seems favourable to our setting 
about this task in a fruitful way. But this is merely a semblance. At 
bottom this plethora of information can seduce us into failing to recognize 
the real problem. We shall not get a genuine knowledge of essences simply 
by the syncretistic activity of universal comparison and classification. 
Subjecting the manifold to tabulation does not ensure any actual under- 
standing of what lies there before us as thus set in order. If an ordering 
principle is genuine, ıt has its own content as a thing [Sachgehalt], which 
is never to be found by means of such ordering, but is already presupposed 
in it. So if one is to put various pictures of the world in order, one must 
have an explicit idea of the world as such. And if the ‘world’ itself is 
something constitutive for Dasein, one must have an insight into Dasein’s 
basic structures in order to treat the world-phenomenon conceptually. 

In this chapter we have characterized some things positively and taken 
a negative stand with regard to others; in both cases our goal has been to 
promote a correct understanding of the tendency which underlies the 
following Interpretation and the kind of questions which it poses. 
Ontology can contribute only indirectly towards advancing the positive 
disciplines as we find them today. It has a goal of its own, even if, beyond 
the acquiring of information about entities, the question of Being is the 
spur for all scientific seeking. 


53 


Il 


BEING-IN-THE-WORLD IN GENERAL AS THE 
BASIC STATE OF DASEIN 


9 ı2. A Preliminary Sketch of Being-in-the-World, in terms of an Orientation 
towards Being-in as such 
In our preparatory discussions (Section 9) we have brought out some 
characteristics of Being which will provide us with a steady light for our 
further investigation, but which will at the same time become structurally 
concrete as that investigation continues. Dasein is an entity which, in its 
very Being, comports itself understandingly towards that Being. In saying 
this, we arecalling attention to the formal conceptof existence. Dasein exists. 
Furthermore, Dasein is san ı entity which in each case I myself am. Mineness 
belongs to any existent Dasein, ein, and belongs to it as the condition which 
makes authenticity and inauthenticity ‘possible. In each case Dasein exists in 
one or the other of these two modes, or else it is modally undifferentiated.! 
But thege are both ways in which Dasein’s Being takes-on a, definite 


character, an be must ‘be. seen_and ı understood a priori as ae 


„wu 


"ee min Iii 


analytic of Dasein Fe 

Thecompound expression ‘Being-in-the-world’ indicates in the very way 
we have coined it, that it stands for a unz phenomenon. This primary 
datum must be seen as a whole. But while Botnet n-the-world cannot be 
broken up into contents which may be pieced together, this does not prevent 
it from having several constitutive items in itsstructure. Indeed the pheno- 
menal datum which our expression indicates is one which may, in fact, be 
looked at in three ways. If westudy it, keeping the whole phenomenon firmly 
in mind beforehand, the following items may be brought out for emphasis: 

First, the ‘in-the-world’. With regard to this there arises the task of 
“Inquiring into the ontological structure of the ‘world’ and defining the 
idea of worldhood as such. (See the third chapter of this Division.) 


— 


1 ‘Zum existierenden Dasein gehört die Jemeinigkeit als Bedingung der Möglichkeit 
von Eigentlichkeit und Uneigentlichkeit. Dasein existiert je in einem dieser Modi, bzw. 
in der modalen Indifferenz ihrer.’ 


I. 2 Being and Time 79 


Second, that entity which.in every case has Being-in-the-world as the 


way in which it is. Here we are seeking that which one inquires into when 
one asks the question ‘Who?’ By a phenomenological ae we 
shall determine who is in the mode of Dasein’s average everydayness. 
(See the fourth chapter of this Division.) | 

Third, Being-ın [In-sein] as such. We must set forth the ontological 
Constitution of inhood [Inheit] itself, (See the fifth chapter of this 
Division.) Emphasis upon any one of these constitutive items signifies 
that the others are emphasized along with it; this means that in any such 
casesthe whole phriomenon gets seen. Of course Being-in-the-world is a 
state of Dasein? which is necessary a priori Hae it is far from sufficient for 
completely determining Dasein’s ad, Before making these three 
phenomena the themes for special analyses, we shall attempt by way of 
orientation to characterize the third of these factors. 

What is meant by “Being-ın”’? Our proximal reaction is to round out 
this expression to ‘‘Being-in ‘in the world’’’, and we are inclined to 
understand this Being-in as ‘Being in something’ [“Sein in... .”’]. This 
latter term designates the kind of Being which an entity has when it is 
‘in’ another one, as the water is ‘in’ the glass, or the garment is ‘in’ the 
cupboard. By this ‘in’ we mean the relationship of Being which two 
entities extended ‘in’ space have to each other with regard to their location 
in that space. Both water and glass, garment and cupboard, are ‘in’ space 
and ‘at’ a location, and both in the same way. This relationship of Being 
can be expanded: for instance, the bench is in the lecture-room, the 
lecture-room is in the university, the university is in the city, and so on, 
until we can say that the bench is ‘in world-space’. All entities whose 
Being ‘in’ one another can thus be described have the same kind of Being 
—that of Being-present-at-hand—as Things occurring ‘within’ the world. 
Being-present-at-hand ‘in’ something which is likewise present-at-hand, 
and Being-present-at-hand-along-with [Mitvorhandensein] in the sense 
of a definite location-relationship with something else which has the same 
kind of Being, are ontological characteristics which we call “categorial” : 
they are of such a sort as to belong to entities whose kind of Being is not 
of the character of Dasein. 

Being-in, on the other hand, is a state of Dasein’s Being; it is an 
existentiale. So _cne_cannot Giiik oF Has the Being-present- 
at-hand of some corporea mg “(such as a human bod aan body) ‘in’ an 
entity which i is s present-at-hand. Nor does th&Ieım -“  “Being-in” mean 


1 Here we follow the older editions in reading, ‘Ausweisung’. The newer editions have 
‘Aufweisung’ (‘exhibition’). 
. Verfassung des Daseins . . .’ The earliest editions read ‘Wesens’ instead 
‘Daseins’. Correction is made in a list of errata. 


54 


80 Being and Time I. 2 
a spatial ‘in-one-another-ness’ of things present-at-hand, any more than 
the word ‘in’ primordialiy signifies a spatial relationship of this kind.‘ ‘In’ 
ir derived from “‘innan’’—-‘‘to reside”, “habitare”, “to dwell” [sich auf nai- 
tor. ‘An’ signifies “I am accustomed”, “I am familiar with’, “À look 
sfver something”.? It has the signification of ‘‘cofo” in the senses of “hadin” 
ans “diligo”. The entity to which Being-in in this signification belongs + 
on: which we have characterized as that entity which in eacn case i 
myself am [bin]. The expression ‘din’ is connected with ‘dei’, and so ‘wh 
bin’ [‘I am’] means in its turn “I reside” or “dwell aiongside” the 
world, as that which is familiar to me in such and such a way.’ 
“Being” [Sein], as the infinitive of ‘ick bin’ (that is to say, when it is 
understood as an existentiale), signifies “to reside alongside . . .”’, “to be 
familiar with .. .”’. “Being-in° is thus the | formal existential expression for the 
Being of Dasein, which has Being-in-the-world as its essential state. 

cing alongside’ the world in the sense of being absorbed in the world? 


1 Reading ‘innan—wohnen’. As Heidegger points out in his footnote, this puzzling 
passage has its source in Grimms Kleinere Schriften, Vol. VIL, pp. 247 il., where we find 
two short articles, the first entitled ‘IN’ amd the second ‘IN UND BEP. The first 
article begins by comparing a number of archaic German words meaning ‘domus’, all 
having a form similar to our English ‘inn’, which Grimm mentions. He gocs on to 
postulate ‘a strong verb “innan”, which must have meant either “Aabitare””, “domt esse", 
or “‘recipere in domum” ’ (though only a weak derivative form ‘innian’ is actually found), 
with a surviving strong preterile written either as ‘an’ or as ‘ann’. Grimm gocs on 
to argue that the preposition ‘in’ is derived trom the verb, rather than the verb from the 
preposition. 

24), . “an” bedeutet: ich bin gewohnt, vertraut init, ich pflege etwas... 

In Grimms second article he adds: ‘there was also an anomalous “ana” with the phiral 
“unnum”, which expressed tamo“, diligo“, ‘fare’, and ‘to which our ‘gonnen’ and 
“Gunst” are immediately related. as has long been recognized. “alae? really means “ich 
bin eingewchnt”’, “pflege zu banen”?; this conceptual transiGon may be shown with 
minimal complication in the Latin “coio”, which stands for habito” as well as "dıligo"”.’ 

It is not entirely clear whether Heidegger's discussion of ‘an’ is ahned to clucidate the 

reposition ‘an’ (which corresponds in some of its usages to the English ‘at’, and which he 

as just used in remarking that the water and the glass are both at a location), or rather 
to explain the preterite ‘an’ of ‘itman’. 

The reader should note that while the verh ‘wohnen’ normally means ‘to reside’ or ‘to 
dwell’, the «expression ‘ich bin gewohnt’ means ‘T am accustomed to', and ‘ich bin einge- 
wohnt’ means ‘I have become accustomed to the place where 1 reside---to my surround- 
ings’. Similarly ‘ich pflege etwas’ may mean either ‘f am accustomed to do something’ 
or ‘I take eare of something’ or ‘I devote myself to it’. (Grimm's ‘pflege zu bauen’ pre- 
sumably means ‘I am accustomed to putting my trust in something’, ‘1 can build on it’.) 
The Latin, ‘colo’ has the parallel! meanings of 'I take care of something’ or ‘cherish’ it 
(‘diligo’) and ‘1 dwell’ or ‘I inhabit’ Chadito’). 

3°... ich wohne, halte mich auf be: . .. der Welt, als dem so und so Vertrauten.’ The 
preposition ‘ber’, hke ‘an’, docs not have quite the semantical range of any English pre- 
position. Our ‘alongside’, with which we shall translate it when other devices scem less 
satisfactory, especially in the phrase ‘Being alongside’ (‘Sein bei’), is often quite mis- 
leading; the sense here is closer to that of ‘at’ in such expressions as ‘at home’ or ‘at my 
father's’, or that of the French ‘chez’. Here again Heidegger seems to be relying upon 
Grimm, who procecds (lee. cit.) to connect ‘bet’ with ‘bauen’ (‘build’) and ‘bin’. - 

a*,..indem... Sinne des Aufgchens in der Welt...’ ‘Aufgehen’ means fiterally ‘to go 
up’, or ‘to rise’ in the sense that the sun ‘riscs’ or the dough ‘rises’. But when followed by 
the preposition ‘in’, it takcs on other meanings, Thus 5 ‘geht auf’ into 30 in the sense that 


I. 2 Being and Time 81 


(a sense which calls for still closer interpretation) is an existentiale founded 


upon Being-in. In thesé analyses the issue is one of seeing a primordial 
structure of Dasein’s Being—a structure in accordance with whose phe- 
nomenal content the concepts of Being must be Articulated; because of 
this, and because this structure is in principle one which cannot be 
grasped by the traditional ontological categories, this “being-alongside’ 
must be examined still more closely. We shall again choose the method of 
contrasting it with a relationship of Being which is essentially different 
ontologically—ztz. categorial— but which we express by the sarne linguis- 
tic means. Fundamental ontological distinctions are easily obliterated; 
and if they are to be envisaged phenomenally in this way, this must be 
done explicitly, even at the risk of discussing the ‘obvious’. The status of 
the ontological analytic shows, however, that we have been far from 
interpreting these obvious matters with an adequate ‘grasp’, still less with 
regard for the meaning of their Being; and we are even farther from 
possessing a stable coinage for the appropriate structural concepts. 

As an existentiale, “Being alongside’ the world never means anything 
like the Being-present-at-hand-together of Things that occur. There is nd 
such thing as the ‘side-by-side-ness’ of an entity called ‘Dasein’ with 
another entity cail-d ‘world’. Of course when two things are present-at- 
haud together alonyside one another,! we are accustomed to express this 
occasionally by something like ‘The table stands “by” [‘bei’] the door’ 
or “The chair “touches” ["berührt’] the wall’. Taken strictly, ‘touching’ is 
never what we ars talking about in such cases, not because accurate re- 
examination will always eventually establish that there is a space between 
the chair and the wall, but because in principle the chair can never touch 
the wall, even if tue space between them should be equal to zero. If the 
chair could touch the wall, this would presuppose that the wall is the sort 
of thing ‘for? which a chair would be encounterable.” An entity present-at- 
hand within the world can be touched by another entity only if by its 
very nature the latter entity has Being-in as its own kind of Being—only if, 
with its Being-thcre [Da-sein], something like the world is already re- 
vealed to it, so that from out of that world another entity can manifest 
itself in touching, and thus become accessible in its Being-present-at- 
hand. When two entities are present-at-hand within the world, and fur- 
thermore are worldless in themselves, they can never ‘touch’ cach other, 


it ‘goes into’ go without remainder; a country ‘geht auf’ into another country into which 
it is taken over or absorbed; a person ‘geht auf’? in anything to which he devotes 
himself fully, whether an activity or another person. We shall usually translate ‘aufgehen’ 
by some form of ‘absorb’. 

1 ‘Das Beisammen zweier Vorhandener .. .’ 

2 ‘Voraussetzung dafür wäre, dass die Wand “für” den Stuhl begegnen könnte.’ (Cf. 
also H. 97 below.) 


C1 


we 
Sr 


CN 


$a Being and Time I.2 


Wor can either cf them ‘be’ ‘alongside’ the other. The clause ‘furthermore 
are wotlt ‘ess’ nust net be left out; for even entities which are not world- 


less—D: tt fer ex: mole—are pr. sent-at-hand ‘in’ the wer. , or, 
more ex some right and .. itso certain tints : 4 a3 
merely ; . To do this, one © «s:t „„iapletei, sro. © Site: 
_ not see: T nate of Being-in, ioe the act tha? Praci -e0 be 
*. faken « oil. ich is present-at-band and just present-ai ‘13 
-not to L; eaw! acertain way of‘presence-athand’ wrishisisa cins 
oun, Th r kind of presefice-at-hand becomes accessible mu uv dis- 
7 regardi: sin’s specific structures but only by understandiay rin 
advance. :... ¿m understands its ownmost Being in the sense oi i erain 
‘factual ~ . -;-present-at-hand’.Mi And: yet the ‘factuality’ œt ‘he fact 
‚[Tatsach. Y one’s own Dasein i is, ‘at bottom quite different ontio cay 


from the í «:*-1:1 occurrence of some kind of mineral, for exampie. When- 
ever Das: + $$, it is as a Fact; and the factuality of such a Fact is what we 
shall call Dasein’ s “facticity”.+ ‘This:is aidefinite way of Being [Seinsbe- 
stimmthei:}, and it has a complicated structure which cannot even be 
grasped as a problem until Dasein’ s basic: existential states have been 
worked out. The concept of “factieity” implies that an entity ‘within-the- 
world’ has Being-in-the-world i in such a way ‘that it can understand itself 
‘as ‘bound up in its ‘destiny’ with the. Being of those entities which it 
encounters within its own world. : 

In the first instance it is endigh tq ‘see the ontological difference 
between Being-in as an existentiale and the category of the ‘insideness’ 
which things: present-at-hand cam ave ‘with regard to one another. By 
thus delimitisfg Being-in, we are’ "not. denying every kind of ‘spatiality’ 
‘to Dasein. On the contrary, Dasein itself has; a’ “Being-in-space’ of its 
own; but this in turn is ‘possible only. on the basis of Being-in-thé-world in 
general. Hence Being-in is not t6- be explained ontologically by some 
ontical characterization, as if ong were to say, for instance, that Being-in 
in a world is a spiritual property, and that man’s ‘spatiality’ is a result of 
his bodily nature (which, at thé same time, always gets ‘founded’ upon 
corporeality). Here again we are faced with the Being-preseni-at-hand- 
together ‘of some such spiritual Thing along with a corporeal Thing, 
while the Being of the entity, thus compounded remains more obscure 


1 ‘Die Tatsächlichkeit des Faktums Dasein, als welches jeweilig ide Dasein ist, 
nennen wir seine Faktizilat.’ We shall as a rule translate “Tatsächlichkeit’ as ‘factuality’, 
and ‘Faktizitat’ as ‘facticity’, following our conventions for ‘tatsächlich’ and ‘faktisch’. 
(See note 2, p. 27, H. 7 above.) The present passage suggests a comparable distinction 
between the nouns ‘Tatsache’ and ‘Faktum’; so while we find many passages where these 
seem to be used interchangeably, we translate ‘Faktum’ as ‘Fact’ with an initial capital, 
using “fact’ for “Tatsache’ and various other expressions. On ‘factuality’ and ‘facticity’ 
sce also H. 135 below. | | 


— i 


I. 2 Being and Time 83 


than ever. Not until we understand Being-in-the-world as an essential 
structure of Dasein can we have any insight into Dasein’s existential 
spatiality. Such an insight will keep us from failing to see this structure or 
from previously cancelling it out—a procedure motivated not ontologi- 


cally but rather ‘metaphysically’ by the naïve supposition that man is,- 


in the first instance, a spiritual Thing which subsequently gets misplaced 
‘into’ a space. 7 
Dasein’s facticity is such that its Being-in-the-world has always dis- 
persed [zerstreut] itself or even split itself up into definite ways of Being- 
in. The multiplicity of these is indicated by the following examples: having 
to do with something, producing something, attending to something and 


looking after it, making use of something, giving something up and letting 


it go, undertaking, accomplishing, evincing, interrogating, considering, 
discussing, determining. . . . All these ways of Being-in have concern! as 
their kind of Being—a kind of Being which we have yet to characterize in 
detail. Leaving undone, neglecting, renouncing, taking a rest—these too 
are ways of concern; but these are all deficient modes, in which the pos- 
sibilities of concern are kept to a ‘bare minimum’. The term ‘concern’ 
has, in the first instance, its colloquial [vorwissenschaftliche] signification, 
and can mean to carry out something, to get: it done [erledigen], to 
‘straighten it out’. It can also mean to ‘provide oneself with something’.® 
We use the expression with still another characteristic turn of phrase 
when we say *‘I am concerned for the success of the undertaking.”* Here 
‘concern’ means something like apprehensiveness. In contrast to these 
colloquial ontical significations, the expression ‘concern’ will be used in 


this investigation as an ontological term for an existentiale, and will desig- - 


nate the Being ofa possible way of Being-in-the-workd. This term has 
been chosefi not because Dasein happens to be proximally and to a large 
„extent ‘pra¢tical’ and economic, but because the Being of Daseig: itself 
ice eee ee a oar ai l 

1 ‘Besorg’ -As Heidegger points out, he wilf use this term in a special sense which is to 
be distinguished from many of its customary usages. We shall, as a rule, translate it by 
‘concern’, though this is by no means an exact equivalent. The English word ‘concern’ is 

«used in many expressions where ‘Besorgen’ would be inappropriate in German, such as 
“This concerns you’, ‘That is my concern’, ‘He has an interest in sevefal banking con- 
cerns’. ‘Besorgen’ stands rather for the kind of ‘concern’ in which we ‘concern ourselves’ 
with activities which we perform or things which we procure. ur 

2‘ | alle Modi des “Nur noch” in bezug auf Möglichkeiten des Besorgens.’ The point 
is that in thege cases concern is just barely (‘nur noch’) involved. 

3‘. . sich etwas besorgen im Sinne von “sich etwas verschaffen” .’ 

4‘... ich besorge, dass das Unternehmen misslingt.’ Here it is not difficult to find a 
corresponding of ‘concern’, as our version suggests. But the analogy is imperfect. 
While we can say that we are ‘concerned for the success of the enterprise’ or “concerned 
lest the enterprise should fail,’ we would hardly follow the German to the extent of 
expressing ‘concern that’ the enterprise. should fail; nor would the German express 
‘Besorgen’ at discovering that the enterprise has failed already. . 


m4 


57 


58 


84 Being and Time I.2 


is to be made visible as care. This expression too is to be taken as an 
ontological structura! concept. (See Chapter 6 of this Division.) It has 
nothing to do with ‘tribulation’, ‘melancholy’, or the ‘cares of life’, though 
ontically one can come across these in every Dasein. These—like their 
opposites, ‘gaiety’ and ‘freedom from care’—are ontically possible only 
because Dasein, when understood ontologically, is care. Because Being-in- 
the-world belongs essentially to Dasein, its Being towards the world [Sein 
zur Welt] is essentially concern. 

From what we have been saying, it follows that Being-in is not a ‘pro- 
perty? which Dasein sometimes has and sometimes does not have, and 
without which it could be just as well as it could with it. It is not the case 
that man ‘is’ and then has, by way of an extra, a relationship-of-Being 
towards the ‘world’—a world with which he provides himself occasionally.” 
Dasein is never ‘proximally’ an entity which is, so to speak, free from 
Being-in, but which sometimes has the inclination to take up a ‘relation- 
ship’ towards the world. Taking up relationships towards the world is 
possible only because Dasein, as Being-in-the-world, is as it is. This state of 
Being does not arise just because some other entity is present-at-hand 
outside of Dasein and meets up with it. Such an entity can ‘meet up with’ 
Dasein only in so far as it can, of its own accord, show itself within a world. 

Nowadays there is much talk about ‘man’s having an environment 
[Umwelt]’; but this says nothing ontologically as long as this ‘having’ is 
left indefinite. In its very possibility this ‘having’ is founded upon the 
existential state of Being-in. Because Dasein is essentially an entity with 
Being-in, it can explicitly discover those entities which it encounters 
environmentally, it can know them, it can avail itself of them, it can have 
the ‘world’. To talk about ‘having an environment’ is ontically trivial, 
but ontologically it presents a problem. To solve it requires nothing else 
than defining the Being of Dasein, and doing so in a way which is onto- 
logically adequate. Although this state of Being is one of which use has 
made in biology, especialiy since K. von Baer, one must not conclude 
that its philosophical use implies ‘biologism’. For the environment is a 
structure which even biology as a positive science can never find and can 
never define, but must presuppose and constantly employ. Yet, even as an 
a priori condition for the objects which biology takes for its theme, this 
structure itself can be explained philosophically only if it has been con- 
ceived beforehand as a structure of Dasein. Only in terms of an orientation 


1 ‘Sorge’. The important etymological connection between ‘Besorgen’ (‘concern’) and 
‘Sorge’ (‘care’) is lost in our translation. On ‘Sorge’ see especially Sections 41 and 42 
below. 


2 ‘Der Mensch “ist” nicht und hat überdies noch ein Seinsverhältnis zur “Welt”, die 
er sich gelegentlich zulegt.’ 


I. 2 Being and Time 85 


towards the ontological structure thus conceived can ‘life’ as a state 
of Being be defined a priori, and this must be done in a privative manner.! 
Ontically as well as ontologically, the priority belongs to Being-in-the 
world as concern. In the analytic of Dasein this structure undergoes a 
basic Interpretation. 

But have we not confined ourselves to negative assertions in all our 
attempts to determine the nature of this state of Being? Though this 
Being-in is supposedly so fundamental, we always keep hearing about 
what it is net. Yes indeed. But there is nothing accidental about our 
characterizing it predominantly in so negative a manner. In doing so we 
have rather made known what is peculiar to this phenomenon, and our 
characterization is therefore positive in a genuine sense—a sense appro- 
priate to the phenomenon itself. When Being-in-the-world is exhibited 
phenomenologically, disguises and concealments are rejected because this 
phenomenon itself always gets ‘seen’ in a certain way in every Dasein. 
And it thus gets ‘seen’ because it makes up a basic state of Dasein, and in 
every case is already disclosed for Dasein’s understanding of Being, and 
disclosed along with that Being itself. But for the most part this pheno- 
menon has been explained in a way which is basically wrong, or inter- 
preted in an ontologically inadequate manner. On the other hand, this 
‘seeing in a certain way and yet for the most part wrongly explaining’ 
is itself based upon nothing else than this very state of Dasein’s Being, 
which is such that Dasein itself—and this means also its Being-in-the 
world—gets its ontological understanding of itself in the first instance 
from those entitics which it itself is not but which it encounters ‘within’ 
its world, and from the Being which they possess. 

Both in Dasein and for it, this state of Being is always in some way 
familiar [bekannt]. Now if it is also to become known fe kannt], the 
knowing which such a task explicitly implies takes 15, a. a knowing of 


the world [Wetterkennen]) as the chief exemplifice.ic2 "ec Soulg 
relationship to te world. Knowing the world (roeu‘- - v2 1.2: :.eldress- 
ing oneself to the ‘world’ and discussing it (Aöyos)—U ov ws os as the 
primary mode of Being-in-the-werld, even thought + t world 
does not as such get conceivea. But because ihis s o ‘ Being 
remains ontologically inaccessible, „et is experiences x! a ‘rela- 
tionship’ bet.cen one entity (the world) and as: A) and 
because oxe proximally understands Being by takin or ' . entities 
within-the-.crid for one’s ontn!. wa! foothold, ©% a ive the 
relationship t.iween world and :^ò:<i as grounced ir th entities 

1‘ |. auf derı Wege der Privation .. . The point is thataas er te ~ stand life 


merely as such, ive must make abstraction from the fuller life of Dasein. Seel. . above. 


er 
ir 


86 Being and Time I.2 


themselves and in the meaning of their Being—namely, to conceive it as 
Being-present-at-hand. And even though Being-in-the-world is something 
of which one has pre-phenomenological experience and acquaintance 
[erfahren und gekannt], it becomes invisible if one interprets it in a way 
which is ontologically inappropriate. This state of Dasein’s Being is now 
one with which one is just barely acquainted (and indeed as sorgething 
obvious), with the stamp of an inappropriate interpretation. So in this 
way it becomes the ‘evident’ point of departure for problems of epistemo- 
logy or the ‘metaphysics of knowledge’. For what is mere obvious than 
that a ‘subject’ is related to an ‘Object’ and vice versa? This ‘subject- 
Object-relationship’ must be presupposed. But whiis this presupposition 
is unimpeachable in its facticity, this makes it indeed a balefui-one, if its 
oniological necessity and especially its ontclogical meaning are to be left 
in the dark, 

Thus the phenomenon of Being-in has for the me-t pert been repre- 
sented exclusively by a singie excinplar—knowing the wo 1d. This has not 
only been the case in epistemology; for even practical bel.aviour has been - 
undersioor. as behaviour which is ‘non-theoreticai’ and ‘atheoretical’. 
Because knowing has been given this priority; cur undercianding of its own- 
most kind of Being gets led astray, and accordingly Seing-in-the-world: 
must be exhibited even more precisely with regara tu snowing the world,. 
atid must itseit be made visible as an oxistential ‘niccauty’ of Being-in. 


r5. A Fournd:d Mode in which Deing-inl iy Exermplijei‘ nsterng the Worle. 
Sf Be a -the-~world is a pbati? state of Dasein, anc one in which Dasein 


operates not only in general bu: pre-eminently i ia tho made of everyday- 
ness, then \t must also be someihing which has always Leen experienced 


prcically, It wouid be nintelligible for Seing-in-the-world to remain 
cally yelled from: view, especially since Dasein nar at its disposal.an 
urderstzuding of is own Remg, no matter how ucelnitely this under- 
serine auey fouocuon. But no sooner was the ‘snenomenon of 


i $ = “a >) $ E ERa -i ate Rem AST oes m. ii welt ees ers None >, 5 r š j Ga r > 
Isle TTS wel; TAS Me TEAN or Coi SLT ieee n a stperheial à 
ee s pie. sam gr ner furgtees oloro? The concipion of founded’ 
are be on fram Auseri, who intrega tae conve: a ol foun, lieg’ in his Logische 

> ` . . 
very: kungen, vol, (7, Darı T, chanter 2 (second edition, Halle. 1913, p. abr). This 


SERA RO nae Oo STE. ak „„lzased as follows by Marvin Farber in’his The Foundation 
en A naga Cac nie tt, Mascachuss t, 1942. T. 297) ‘Tia accordance with essential 


WW OM den Only cast oa u Lomorehensive unity weich connects h with a a, then we 
Say Ana ds sich nee cessation chromgn au, u also. ar a as such is in need of com- 
EB Dy MERAS GI i, fe cordingly aco ay air” des; 2.2 particuiar cases of tie pure 
ea, Ot a, WANT ote. cm Che cec y elatis rip, aoa if chery are members of ons 


gig, her we say thai ag ‘Sounded b+ ag; auc it is exciustuc!y founded by pe if the need 

the onneton of ay is some sadstied oy atc. Chas cerimmology can be applicd to the 
species themselves; the equivocation is harniless.’ Thus a founded mode of Being-in is 
simply a mode which can subsist only when connected with something else. 


I. 2 Being and Time 87 


formal manner. The evidence for this is the procedure (still customary 
today) of setting up knowing as a ‘relation between subject and Object’ 
—a procedure in which there lurks as much ‘truth’ as vacuity. But subject 
and Object do not coincide with Dasein and the world. 

Even if it were feasible to give an ontological definition of “Being-in” 
primarily in terms of a Being-in-the-world which knows, it would still be our 
first task to show that knowing has the phenomenal character of a Being 
which is in and towards the world. If one reflects upon this relationship of 
Being, an entity called “Nature” is given proximally as that which becomes 
known. Knowing, as such, is not to be met in this entity. If knowing ‘is’ at 
all, it belongs solely to those entities which know. But even in those entities, 
human-Things, knowing is not present-at-hand. In any case, it is not 
externally ascertainable as, let us say, bodily properties are.1 Now, inas- 
much as knowing belongs to these entities and is not some external 
characterietic, it must be ‘inside’. Now the more unequivocally one main- 
tains that knowing is preximally and really ‘inside’ and indeed has by uc 
means the same kind of Being as entities which are both physical and 
psychical, the less one presupposes when one believes that one is making 
headway in the question of the essence of knowledge and in the clarifice- 
tion of the relationship between subject and Object. For only then can 
the problem arise of how this knowing subject comes out of its inner 
‘sokere’ into cat which is ‘other and external’, of how knowing can have 
any object at all, and of now one must think of the object itself so that 
aventually the subject knows it without needing to venture a leap inte 
another sphere, But in any of the numerous varieties which this approach 
may take, the questicn of the kind of Being which belongs to this knowing 
subject is left entirely unasked, though whenever its knowing gets handled, 
its way of Being is already included tacitly in one’s theme. Of course we 
are sometimes assured that we are certainly not to think of the subject's 
“inside” [Innen] and its “inuer sphere’ as a sort of ‘box’ or ‘cabinet’. But 
when one asas for the positive signification of this ‘inside’ of immanenc 
in which knowing iz proximasly enclosed, or when one inquires how this 
‘Ceiag inside’? [uinctsems’} whica knuwing possesses has its own char- 
eater of Being grounded in the kiad of Being whith belongs io the subje..., 
then silence reigns. And no matter how this inner sphere may get inter- 
orcted, if one does no more than ask how sucwirg makes its way “our on 
iq and achieves ‘transcendence’, it becomes svident that the ke 
which presents such enigmas will remain: vy colematicu. unless oc 
oreviously clariBed now itis and what itis. 


` “In jedem Falle ist est nicht so äusserlich feststellbar wie etwa leibliche Eigen: 
2.2 older editions have '. . . nicht ist es...’ and place a comma after ‘feststellbar’. 


88 Being and Time I. 2 


With this kind of approach one remains blind to what is already 
tacitly implied even when one takes the phenomenon of knowing as one’s 
theme in the most provisional manner: namely, that knowing is a mode 
of Being of Dasein as Being-in-the-world, and is founded ontically upon 
this state of Being. But if, as we suggest, we thus find phenomenally that 
knowing is a kind of Being which belongs to Being-in-the-world, one might object 
that with such an Interpretation of knowing, the problem of knowledge 
is nullified; for what is left to be asked if one presupposes that knowing is 
already ‘alongside’ its world, when it is not supposed to reach that world 
except in the transcending of the subject? In this question the construc- 
tivist ‘standpoint’, which has not been phenomenally demonstrated, again 
comes to the fore; but quite apart from this, what higher court is to decide 
whether and in what sense there is to be any problem of knowledge other 
than that of the phenomenon of knowing as such and the kind of Being 
which belongs to the knower ? 

If we now ask what shows itself in the phenomenal findings about 
knowing, we must keep in mind that knowing is grounded beforehand 
in a Being-already-alongside-the-world, which is essentially constitutive 
for Dasein’s Being. Proximally, this Being-already-alongside is not just 
a fixed staring at something that is purely present-at-hand. Being-in-the- 
world, as concern, is fascinated by the world with which it is concerned.” 
If knowing is to be possible as a way of determining the nature of the 
present-at-hand by observing it,® then there must first be a deficiency in our 
having-to-do with the world concernfully. When concern holds back 
[Sichenthalten] from any kind of producing, manipulating, and the like, 
it puts itself into what is now the sole remaining mode of Being-in, the 
mode of just tarrying alongside. . . . [das Nur-noch-verweilen bei. . .] 
This kind of Being towards the world is one which lets us encounter 


entities within-the-world purely in the way they look (elSos), just that; 


on the basis of this kind of Being, and as a mode of it, looking explicitly at 
what we encounter is possible.‘ Looking af something in this way is some- 
times a definite way of taking up a direction towards something—of setting 
our sights towards what is present-at-hand. It takes over a ‘view-point’ in 
advance from the entity which it encounters. Such looking-at enters the 


1°... dass das Erkennen selbst vorgängig gründet in einem Schon-sein-bei-der-Welt, 
als welches das Sein von Dasein wesenhaft konstituiert.’ 

8 ‘Das In-der-Welt-sein ist als Besorgen von der besorgten Welt benommen.’ Here we 
follow thc older editions. The newer editions have ‘das Besorgen’ instead of ‘als Besorgen’. 

8 ‘Damit Erkennen als betrachtendes Bestimmen des Vorhandenen möglich sei . . .’ 
Here too we follow the older editions. The newer editions again have ‘das’ instead of ‘als’. . 

£ ‘Auf dem Grunde dieser Seinsart zur Welt, die das innerweltlich begegnende Seiende 


nur noch in seinem puren Aussehen (eos) begegnen lässt, und als Modus dieser Seinsart 
ist ein ausdruckliches Hinschen auf das so Begenende möglich.’ 


I.2 Being and Time 89 


mode of dwelling autonomously alongside entities within-the-world.! In 
this kind of ‘dwelling’ as a holding-oneself-back from any manipulation or 
utilization, the perception of the present-at-hand is consummated.* Per- 
ception is consummated when one addresses oneself to something as some- 
thing and discusses it as such.* This amounts to interpretation in the broadest 
sense; and on the basis of such interpretation, perception becomes an act 
of making determinate.4 What is thus perceived and made determinate can 
be expressed in propositions, and can be retained and preserved as what 
has thus been asserted. This perceptive retention of an assertion® about 
something is itself a way of Being-in-the-world; it is not to be Interpreted 
as a ‘procedure’ by which a subject provides itself with representations 
[Vorstellungen] of something which remain stored up ‘inside’ as having 
been thus appropriated, and with regard to which the question of how 
they ‘agree’ with actuality can occasionally arise. 

When Dasein directs itself towards something and grasps it, it does not 
somehow first get out of an inner sphere in which it has been proximally 
encapsulated, but its primary kind of Being is such that it is always 
‘outside’ alongside entities which it encounters and which belong to a 
world already discovered. Nor is any inner sphere abandoned when 
Dasein dwells alongside the entity to be known, and determines its char- 
acter; but even in this ‘Being-outside’ alongside the object, Dasein is still 
‘inside’, if we understand this in the correct sense; that is to say, it is itself 
‘inside’ as a Being-in-the-world which knows. And furthermore, the 
perceiving of what is known is not a process of returning with one’s booty 
to the ‘cabinet’ of consciousness after one has gone out and grasped it; 
even in perceiving, retaining, and preserving, the Dasein which knows 
remains outside, and it does so as Dasein. If I ‘merely ’know [Wissen] about 
some way in which the Being of entities is interconnected, if I ‘only’ 
represent them, if I ‘do no more’ than ‘think’ about them, I am no less 


1 ‘Solches Hinsehen kommt selbst in den Modus eines eigenständigen Sichaufhaltens 
bei dem innerweltlichen Seienden.’ 

$ ‘In sogerateten ‘‘Aufenthalt’’—als dem Sichenthaiten von jeglicher Hantierung and 
Nutzung — vollzieht sich das Vernehmen des Vorhandenen.’ The word ‘Aufenthalt’ norm- 
ally means a stopping-off at some place, a sojourn, an abiding, or even an abode or dwel- 
ling. Here the author is exploiting the fact that it includes both the prefixes ‘auf-’ and 
‘ent-’, which we find in the verbs ‘aufhalten’ and ‘enthalten’. ‘Aufhalten’ means to hold 
something at a stage which it has reached, to arrest it, to stop it; when used reflexively it 
can mean to stay at a place, to dwell there. While ‘enthalten’ usually means to contain, 
it preserves its more literal meaning of holding back or refraining, when it is used re- 
flexively. All these meanings are presumably packed into the word ‘Aufenthalt’ as used 
here, and are hardly suggested by our ‘dwelling’. 

9 ‘Das Vernehmen hat die Vollzugsart des Ansprechens und Besprechens von etwas als 
etwas.’ On ‘something as something’ see Section 32 below (H. 149), where ‘interpretation’ 
is also discussed. 

4‘... wird das Vernehmen zum Bestimmen.’ 

5 Aussage’. For further discussion see Section 33 below, 


62 


go Being end Time 1.2 


alongside the entities outside in tle world ihan when I originally grasp 
thern.! Even the forgetting of something, in which every relationship of 
Being towards what one formerly knew has seemingly been obliterated, 
must be conceived as a modification of the primordial Being-in; and this holds 
for every delusion and for every error. 

We have now pointed out how those modes cf Being-in-the-world 
which are constitutive for knowing the world are interconnected in their 
foundations; this makes it plain that in knowing, Dasein achieves a new 
status of Being [Seinsstand] towards a worid which has already been dis- 
covered in Dasein itself. This pew possibility of Being can develop itselt 
autonomously; it can become a task to be accomplished, and as scientific 
knowledge it can take over the guidanc: for Being-in-the-world. But a 
‘commercium’ of the subject with a world dues not get creaied for the first 
time by knowing, nor does it arise from soas way in which the world acts 
upon a subject. Knowing is a mode cf Passin foundec! upon Being-in-the- 
world. Thus Being-in-the-world, as a Lesie stete, nusi be Interpreted 
heforehand. 


+ 


i‘, .. bei einem erigindren Exlassen.’ 


III 
THE WORLDHOOD OF THE WORLD 


F 14. The Idea of ths Worldkood of the World! in General 
BEING-IN-THE-WORLD shall first be made visible with regard to that 
item of its structure which is the ‘world’ itself To accomplish this task 
seems easy and so trivial as to make cne keep taking for granted that it 
may be dispensed with. What can be meant by describing ‘the world’ as 
a phenpmenan? It means to let us see what shows itself in ‘entities’ within 
the world. Here the first step is to enumerate the things that are ‘in’ the 
world: houses, trees, people, mouyiains, stars. We can depict the way such 
entities “iook’, and we can give an eccount of occurrences in thera and with 
tnem. ‘us, however, is opviously a pre-phenomenological ‘business’ 
which cannot be at all relevant phenomerologically. Such a descrintion is 
always confined to entities, It is ontical. Bur what we are seeking is Being, 
And we have formally defined ‘phecomenon’ in the phenomenological 
sense as that which shows itself as Being and as a structure of Being. 
Thus, to give a phenomenological description of the ‘world’ will mean 
io exhibit the Being of chose’entities which are present-at-hand within 
the world, and to fix it in contepts which are categorial. Now the ehtities 
within the world are Things—Things of Nature, and Things ‘invested 
with value’ [‘‘wertbehaftete” Dinge]. Their Thinghood becomes a 
problem; ana to the extent that the Thinghood of Things ‘invested with 
salue is baszd upon the Thinghoed of Nature, our primary theme is 
the Being of Things of Nature—Nature as such. That characteristic of 
Being which belongs to Things of Nature (substances), and upon which 
2 Welt’, ‘weltlich’. ‘Weltlichkeit’, ‘Weltmassigkeit’. We shall usually translate ‘Welt’ 
as ‘the worid’ or ‘a vorid, following idiom, though Heidegger frequently omits 
;the article when he wishes to refer to ‘Welt’ as a ‘characteristic’ of Dasein. In ordinary 
German the adjective ‘weltlich’ and the derivative noun ‘Weltlichkeit? have much the 
‚same connotations as the English ‘worldly’ and ‘wordline’; burt the meanings which 
Heidegger assigns to chem (H. 65) are quite different from thase of their English cognates. 
At the risk of obscuring the etymological connection and gecasionally misleading the 
‚reader, we shall translate ‘weltlich’ as ‘worldly’, ‘Weitiichkeit’ as ‘worldhood’, and 
‘Weltmässigkeit’ as ‘worldly character’. The reader must ee in mind, however, that 
there is no suggestion here of the ‘worldliness’ of the ‘man of the world’, = =- 


92 Being and Time 1.3 


everything is founded, is substantiality. What is its ontological meaning ? 
By asking this, we have given an unequivocal direction to our inquiry. 

But is this a way of asking ontologically about the ‘world’? The 
problematic which we have thus marked out is one which is undoubtedly 
ontological. But even if this ontology should itself succeed in explicating 
the Being of Nature in the very purest manner, in conformity with the 
basic assertions about this entity, which the mathematical natural 
sciences provide, it will never reach the phenomenon that is the ‘world’. 
Nature is itself an entity which is encountered within the world and 
which can be discovered in various ways and at various stages. 

Should we then first attach ourselves to those entities with which 
Dasein proximally and for the most part dwells—Things ‘invested with 
value’? Do not these ‘really’ show us the world in which we live? Perhaps, 
in fact, they show us something like the ‘world’ more penetratingly. But 
these Things too are entities ‘within’ the world. 

Neither the ontical depiction of entities within-the-world nor the ontological 
Interpretation of their Being is such as to reach the phenomenon of the ‘world,’ In 
both of these ways of access to ‘Objective Being’, the ‘world’ has already 
been ‘presupposed’, and indeed in various ways. 

Is it possible that ultimately we cannot address ourselves to ‘the world’ 
as determining the nature of the entity we have mentioned? Yet we call 
this entity one which is “within-the-world”. Is ‘world’ perhaps a charac- 
teristic of Dasein’s Being ? And in that case, does every Dasein ‘proximally’ 
have its world? Does not ‘world’ thus become something ‘subjective’? 
How, then, can there be a ‘common’ world ‘in’ which, nevertheless, we 
are? And if we raise the question of the ‘world’, what world do we have in 
view? Neither the common world nor the subjective world, but the world- 
hood of the world as such. By what avenue do we meet this phenomenon? 

‘Worldhood’ is an ontological concept, and stands for the structure of 
one of the constitutive items of Being-in-the-world. But we know Being- 
in-the-world as a way in which Dasein’s character is defined existentially. 
Thus worldhood itself is an existentiale. If we inquire ontologically about 
the ‘world’, we by no mean: akandon the analytic of Dasein as a field for 
thematic study. Ontologically, ‘world’ is not a way of characterizing those 
entities which Dasein essentially is not; it is rather a characteristic of 
Dasein itself. This does not ::le ont the possibility that when we investi- 
gate the phenomenon of the ‘wortd’ we must do so by the avenue of 
entities within-the-world an: *he Being which they possess. The task of 
‘describing’ the world phenoin sr." gically is so far from obvious that even 
if we do no more than determine adequately what form it shall take, 
essential ontological clarifications will be needed. 


1.3 Being and Tıme 93 

This discussion ofthe word ‘world’, and our frequent use ofit have made 
it apparent that it is used in several ways. By unravelling these we can get 
an indication of the different kinds of phenomena that are signified, and 
ofthe way in which they are interconnected. 

1. “World” is used as an ontical concept. and signifies the totality of 
those entities which can be present-at-hand within the world. 

2, “World” functions as an ontological term, and signifies the Being 
of those entities which we have just mentioned. And indeed ‘world’ can 
become a term for any realm which encompasses a multiplicity of entities : 
for instance, when one talks of the ‘world’ of a mathematician, ‘world’ 
signifies the realm of possible objects of mathematics. | 

3. “World” can be understood in another ontical sense—not, however, 
as those entities which Dasein essentially is not and which can be en- 
countered within-the-world, but rather as that ‘wherein’ a factical Dasein 
as such can be said to ‘live’. “World” has herea pre-ontological existentiell 
signification. Here again there are different possibilities: “world” may stand 
for the ‘public’ we-world, or one’s ‘own’ closest (domestic) environment.! 

4. Finally, ‘world? designates the ontologico-existential concept of 
worldhood. Worldhood itself may have as its modes whatever structural 
wholes any special ‘worlds’ may have at the time; but it embraces in itself 
the a priort character of worldhood in general. We shall reserve the 
expression ‘‘world”’ as a term for our third signification. If we should 
sometimes use it in the first of these senses, we shall mark this with 
single quotation marks. 

The derivative form ‘worldly’ will then apply terminologically to a 
kind of Being which belongs to Dasein, never to a kind which belongs to 
entities present-at-hand ‘in’ the world. We shall designate these latter 
entities as “belonging to the world” or ‘‘within-the-world”’ [weltzuge- 
hörig oder innerweltlich]. 

A glance at previous ontology shows that if one fails to see Being-in- 
the-world as a state of Dasein, the phenomenon of worldhood likewise 
gets passed over. One tries instead to Interpret the world in terms of the 
Being of those entities which are present-at-hand within-the-world but 
which are by no means proximally discovered—namely, in terms of 
Nature. If one understands Nature ontologico-categorially, one finds that 


"15, , die “eigene” und nächste (häusliche) Umwelt.’ The word ‘Umwelt’, which is 
customarily translated as ‘environment’, means literally the ‘world around’ or the ‘world 
about’. The prefix ‘um-’, however, not only may mean ‘around’ or ‘about’, but, as we 
shall see, can also be used in an expression such as ‘um zu... .’, which is most easily 
translated as ‘in order to’. Section 15 will be largely devoted to a study of several words in 
which this same prefix occurs, though this is by no means apparent in the words we have 
chosen to represent them: ‘Umgang’ (‘dealings’); ‘das Um-zu’ (‘the “‘in-order-to”’ ’); 
‘Umsicht’ (‘circumspection’). | 


65 


66 


94 Being and Time l I. 3 
Nature is a limiting case of the Being of possible entities within-the-world. 
Only in some definite mode of its own Being-in-the-world can Dasein 
discover entities as Nature.! This manner of knowing them has the 
character of depriving the world of its worldhood in a definite way. 
‘Nature’, as the categorial aggregate of those structures of Being which a 
definite entity encountered within-the-world may possess, can never make 
worldhood intelligible. But even the phenomenon of ‘Nature’, as it is 
conceived, for instance, in romanticism, can be grasped ontologically only 
in terms of the concept of the world—that is to say, in terms of the 
analytic of Dasein. 

When it comes to the problem of analysing the world’s worldhood onto- 
logically, traditional ontology operates in a blind alley, if, indeed, it sees 
this problem at all. On the other hand, if we are to Interpret the world- 
hood of Dasein and the possible waysin which Dasein is made worldly 
[Verweltlichung], we must show why the kind of Being with which Dasein 
knows the world is such that it passes over the phenomenon of worldhood 
both ontically and ontologically. But at the same time the very Fact of 
this passing-over suggests that we must take special precautions to get the 
right phenomenal point of departure [Ausgang] for access [Zugäng] to 
the phenomenon of worldhood, so that it will not get passed over. 

Our method has already been assigned [Anweisung]. The theme of 
our analytic is to be Being-in-the-world, and accordingly the very world 
itself; and these are to be considered within the horizon of average every- 
dayness—the kind of Being which is closest to Dasein. We must make a 


.study of everyday Being-iti-the-world; with the phenomenal support 


which this gives us, something like the world must come into view. 
That world of everyday Dasein which, is. closest td it, is the environment. 
From this existential character of ‘average Beirig-in-the-world, our 
investigation will take its fourse [Gang] towards the idea of worldhood 
in general. We shall seek the worldhood of the environment (environ- 
mentality) by going through an ontological Interpretation of those entities 
within-the-environment which we encounter as closest to us. The expression 
“environment” [Umwelt] contains in the ‘environ’ [‘‘um”’] a suggestion 
of spatiality. Yet the ‘around’ [‘“‘Umherum”’] which is constitutive for the 
environment does not have a primarily ‘spatial’ meaning. Instead, the 
spatial character which incontestably belongs.to any environment, can.be. 
clarified only in terms of the structure of worldhood. From this point of 
view, Dasein’s spatiality, of which we have given an indication in Section 
12, becomes phenomenally visible. In ontology, however, an attempt has 


1 ‘Das Seiende als Natur kann das Dasein nur in einem bestimmten Modus seines In- 
der-Welt-seins entdecken.’ 


I. 3 Being and Time 95 
Fa made to start with spatiality and then to Interpret the Being of the 

‘world’ as res extensa. In Descartes we find the most extreme tendency 
per such an ontology of the ‘world’, with, indeed, a counter-orienta- 
thud force as Uae res cogttans— which, does not coincide with Dasein either 
Erica, oro. Aolteaily The analysis. of worldhood whic:: we are here 
as. arg ea. be made clearer if we show how it differ. f om such an 
cafolog:..t tendency. Our analysis will be;completed in caree stages: 
{A} iae analysis of environmentality and worldhood in general; (B) an 
illustrative contrast between our analysis of worldhood and Descartes’ 
ontology of the ‘world’; (C) the aroundness [das Umhafte] of the environ- 
ment, and the ‘spatiality’ of Dasein.! 


A. Analysis of Envtronmentality and Worldhood in General 


{ 15. The Being of the Entities Encountered in the Environment 

The Being of those entities which we encounter as closest to us can be 
exhibited phenomenologically if we take as our clue our everyday Being- 
in-the-world, which we also call our “‘dealings™® in the world and with 
entities within-the-world, Such dealings have already dispersed themselves 
into maniföld ways of concern.” The kind of dealing which is closest to us 
is as we have shown, not a bare perceptual cognition, but rather that 
kind of concern which manipulates things and puts them to use; and this 
has its own kind of ‘knowledge’. The phenomenological question applies 
in the first instance to the Being of those entities which we encounter in 
such concern. To assure the kind of seeing which is here required, we must 
first make a remark about method. 
- In the disclosure and explication of Being, entities are in every case our 
preliminary and our accompanying theme [das Vor-und Mitthematische] ; 
but our real theme is Being. In the domain of the present analysis, the 
entities we shall take as our preliminary theme are those which show them- 
selves in our concern with the environment. Such entities are not thereby 
objects for knowing the ‘world’ theoretically; they are simply what gets 
used, what gets produced, and so forth. As. entities so encountered, they 
become the preliminary theme for the purview of a ‘knowing’ which, as 
phenomenological, looks primarily towards Being, and which, in thus 
taking Being as its theme, takes these entities as its accompanying theme. 
This phenomenological interpretation is accordingly not a way of knowing 


1 A is considered in Sections 15-18; B in Sections 19-21; Ci in Sections 22-24. ı 
% ‘Umgang’. This word means literally a ‘going around’ or ‘going about’, in a not 
too far removed from what we have in mind when we say that someone is ‘going about hie t his 
business’. ‘Dealings’ is by no means an accurate translation, but is perhaps as convenient 
as any. interne and ‘trafficking’ are also possible translations. 
3 See above, H. 57, n. 1, p. 83. 


67 


96 Being and Time 1.3 


those characteristics of entities which themselves are [seiender Beschaff- 
enheiten des Seienden}: it is rather a determination of the structure of 
the Being which entities possess. But as an investigation of Being, it brings 
to completion, autonomously and explicitly, that understanding of Being 
which belongs already to Dasein and which ‘comes alive’ in any of its 
dealings with entities. Those entities which serve phenomenologically as 
our preliminary theme—in this case, those which are used or whieh are 
to be found in the course of production—become accessible when we put 
ourselves into the position of concerning ourselves with them in some 
such way. Taken strictly, this talk about “‘putting ourselves into such a 
position” [Sichversetzen] is misleading; for the kind of Being which 
belongs to such concernful dealings is not one into which we need to put 
ourselves first. This is the way in which everyday Dasein always zs: when 
I open the door, for instance, I use the latch. The achieving of. pheno- 
menological access to the entities which we encounter, consists rather in 
thrusting aside our interpretative tendencies, which keep thrusting them- 
selves upon us and running along with us, and which conceal not only the 
phcenomenen of such ‘concern’, but even morc those entities themselves as 
encountered of their own accord in our concern with them. These entang- 
ling errors become plain if in the course of our investigation we now ask 
which entities shall be taken as our preliminary theme and established as 
the pre-phenomenal basis for our study. 

One may answer: “Things.” But with this obvious answer we have 
perhaps already missed the pıe-phencmenal basis we are seeking. For in 
addressing these entities as ‘Things’ (res), we have tacitly anticipated 
their ontological character. When analysis starts with suclı entities and 
goes on to inquire about Being, what it meets is Thinghood and Reality. 
Ontological explication discovers, as it proceeds, such characteristics of 
Being as substantiality, materiality, extendedness, sidc-by-side-ness, and 
so forth. But even pre-ontologically, in such Being as this, the entities 
which we encounter in concern are proximally hidder. When one desig- 
nates Things as the entities that are ‘proximally given’, one goes onto- 
logically astray, even though ontically one has something else in mind. 
What one really has in mind remains undetermined. But suppose one 
characterizes these ‘Things’ as Things ‘invested with value’? What does 
“value” mean ontologically? How are we to categorize this ‘investing’ 
and Being-invested? Disregarding the obscurity of this structure of 
investiture with value, havé we thus met that phenomenal characteristic 
of Being which belongs to what we encounter in our concernful dealings ? 

The Greeks had an appropriate term for ‘Things’: mpdyara—that is 
to say, that which one has to do with in one’s concernful dealings 


1,3 Being and Time 97 


(mpä£ıs). But ontologically, the specifically ‘pragmatic’ character of 
the mpdypara is just what the Greeks left in obscurity; they thought of 
these ‘proximally’ as ‘mere Things’. We shall call those entities which we 
encounter in concern “equipment”! In our dealings we come across 
equipment foi writing, sewing, working, transportation, measurement, 
The kind of Being which equipment possesses must be exhibited. The 
clue tor doing this lies in our first defining what makes an itern of equip- 
ment-—namely, its equipmentality. 

Taken strictly, there ‘is’ no such thing as an equipment. To the Being 
of any equipment there always belongs a totality of equipment, in which 
it can be this equipment that it is. Equipment is essentially ‘something 
in-order-to...’ [etwas um-zu...”]. A totality of equipment is constituted 
by various ways of the ‘in-order-to’, such as serviceability, conduciveness, 
usability, manipulability. 

In the ‘in-order-to’ as a structure there lies an assignment or reference of 
something to something.” Only in the analyses which are te follow can 
the phenomenon which this term ‘assignment’ indicates be made visible 
in its ontological genesis. Provisionally, it is enough ta take a look 
phenomenally at a manifold of such assignments. Equipment--in. accord- 
ance with its equipmentality—always :s in terms af [aus] ils be:onging to 
other equicment: ink-stand, pen, ink, paper, blotting pad, table, lamp, 
furniture, windows, doors, roorn. These “Uhings’ never show theraselves 


1 ‘das Zeug’. The word ‘Zeug’ has no precise English equivalent. While it ny mean any 
implemezt, instrument, or tool, Heidegger uses it for the most part as a collective noun 
which is analogous to our relatively specific ‘gear’ (as in ‘gear for fishing’, or the more 
elaborate ‘paraphernalia’, or the still more general ‘eqiupment’, which we sha!! employ 
thre aghont this translation. In this collective sense ‘Zeug’ can sometimes he used in a way 
which is comparable to the use of ‘stuff’ in such sentences as ‘there is plenty of stuff lying 
around’. (See H. 74.) In general, however, this pejorative connotation is lacking. For the 
most part Heidegzer uscs the term as a collcctive noun, so that he can say that there is no 
such thing as ‘en equipment’; but he still uses it occasionally with an indefinite article to 
refer to some specific tool or instrument—some item or bit of equipment. 

2 ‘In der Struktur “Um-zu” liegt eine Verweisung von etwas auf etwas.’ There is no close 
English equivalent for the word ‘Verweisung’, which occurs many times in this chapter. 
The basic metaphor seems to be that of turning something awav towards something else, 
or pointing it away, as when one ‘refers’ or ‘commits’ or ‘relegates’ or ‘assigns’ something 
to something clsc, whether one ‘refers’ a symbol to what it svmbolızes, ‘refers’ a beggar 
to a welfare agency, ‘commits’ a person for trial, ‘rclegates’ or ‘banishes’ him to Siberia, 
or even ‘assigns’ equipment to a purpose for which it is to be used. ‘Verweisung’ thus does 
some of the work of ‘reference’, ‘commitment’, ‘assignment’, ‘relegation’, ‘banishment’; 
but it dues not do all the work of any of these expressions. For a businessman tc ‘refer’ to 
a letter, for a symbol to ‘refer’ to what it symbolizes, for a man to ‘commit larceny or 
murder’ or merely to ‘commit himself’ to certain partisan views, for a teacher to give a 
pupil a long ‘assignment’, or even for a journalist to receive an ‘assignment’ to the Vatican, 
we would have to find some other verb than ‘verweisen’. We shall, however, use the 
verbs ‘assign’ and ‘refer’ and their derivatives as perhaps the least misleading substitutes, 
employing whichever seems the more appropriate in the context, and occasionally using 
a hendiadys as in the present passage. See Section 17 for further discussion. (When other 
words such as ‘anweisen’ or ‘zuweisen’ are translated as ‘assign’, we shall usually subjoin 
the German in brackets.) 


D 


98 Being and Time 13 
proximally as they are for themselves, so as to add up to a sum of realia 
and fill up a room. What we encounter as closest to us (though not as 
something taken as a theme) is the room; and we encounter it not 
as something "between four walls’ in a geometrical spatial sense, but as 
equipment for residing. Out of this the ‘arrangement’ emerges, and it is 
in this that any ‘individual’ item of equipment shows itself. Before it does- 
so, a totality of equipment has already been discovered. 

Equipment can genuinely show itself only in dealings cut to its own 
measure (hammering with a hammer, for example) ; but in such dealings 
an entity of this kind is not grasped thematically as an occurring Thing, 
nor is the equipment-structure known as such even in the using. The 
hammering does not simply have knowledge about [um] the hammer’s 
character as equipment, but it has appropriated this equipment in a way 
which could not possibly be more suitable. In dealings such as this, where 
something is put to use, our concern subordinates itself to the “in-order- 
to” which is constitutive for the equipment we are employing at the time; 
the less we just stare at the hammer-Thing, and the more we seize hold 
of it and use it, the more primordial does our relationship to it become, 
and the more unveiledly is it encountered as that which it is—as equip- 
ment. The hammering itself uncovers the specific ‘manipulability’ 
[“Handlichkeit”] of the hammer. The kind of Being which equipment 
possesses—in which it manifests itself in its own right— we call “‘readiness- 
to-hand” [Zuhandenheit].“ Only because equipment has this ‘Being-in- 
itself’ and does not merely occur, is it manipulable in the broadest sense 
and at our disposal. No matter how sharply we just look [Nur-noch- 
hinsehen] at the ‘outward appearance’ [‘‘Aussehen]” of Things in whatever 
form this takes, we cannot discover anything ready-to-hand. If we look 
at Things just ‘theoretically’, we can get along without understanding 
readiness-to-hand. But when we deal with them by using them and mani- 
pulating them, this activity is not a blind one; it has its own kind of sight, 
by~which our manipulation is guided and from which it acquires its 
specific Thingly character. Dealings with equipment subordinate them- 
selves to the manifold assignments of the ‘in-order-to’. And the sight with 
which they thus accommodate themselves is circumspection.* 


1 Italics only in earlier editions. 


2 The word ‘Umsicht’, which we oe by ans ion’, is here presented as 
ae for a special kind of ‘Sicht’ ( (‘sight’). ere, as e here, Heidegger i iş taking 
vantage of the fact that the prefix ‘um’ may mean either ‘around’ or ‘in order to’. 

iki may accordingly be ey of as re De ‘looking around’ or ‘looking around 
for something’ or “looking around for a way to get something done’. In ordinary German 

e, ‘Umsicht’ seems to have much the same connotation as our ‘circumspection’—a 
kind of awareness in which one looks around before one decides just what one ought to 
do next. But Heidegger seems to be generalizing this notion as well as calling attention to 


4, 3 Being and Time 99 
‘Practical’ behaviour is not ‘atheoretical’ in the sense of ‘‘sightlessness”.? 
The way it differs from theoretical behaviour does not lie simply in the 
fact that in theoretical behaviour one observes, while in practical be- 
@haviour one ucts [gehandelt wirä], and that action must employ theoretical 
cognition if it is not to remain blind; for the fact that observation is a kind 
of concérn is just as primordial as the fact that action has its own kind of 
sight. Theoretical behaviour is just looking, without circumspection. But 
the fact that this looking is non-circumspective does not mean that it 
follows no rules: it constructs a canon for itself in the form of methed. 

The ready-to-hand is not grasped theoretically at all, nor is it itself 
the sort of thing that circumspection takes proximally as a circumspective 
theme. The peculiarity of what is proximally ready-to-hand is that, in 
its readiness-to-hand, it must, as it were, withdraw [zuriickzuziehen] in 
order to be ready-to-hand quite authentically. That with which our every- 
day dealings proximally dwell is not the tools themselves [die Werkzeuge 
selbst]. On the contrary, that with which we concern ourselves primarily 
is the work—that which is to be produced at the time; and this is accord- 
ingly ready-to-hand too. The work bears with it that referential totality 
within which the equipment is encountered.” 

The work to be produced, as the “‘towards-which” of such things as the 
hammer, the plane, and the needle, likewise has the kind of Being that 
belongs to equipment. The shoe which is to be produced is for wearing 
(footgear) [Schuhzeug]; the clock is manufactured for telling the time. 
The work which we.chiefly encounter in our concernful dealings—the 
work thaggis to be found when one is “at work” on something [das in 
Arbeit befindliche]—has a usability which belongs to it essentially; in 
this usability it lets us encounter already the “towards-which” for which 
it is usable. A work that someone has ordered [das bestellte Werk] is only 
by reason of its use and the assignment-context of entities which is dis- 
covered in using it. 

But the work to be produced is not merely usable for something. ‘The 


the extent to which circumspection in the narrower sense occurs in our every-day living. 
(The distinction between ‘sight’ (Sicht’) and ‘seeing’ (‘Sehen’) will be developed further 
in Sections 31 and 36 below.) 

1‘... im Sinne der Sichtlosigkeit . . .’ The point of this sentence will be clear to the 
reader who recalls that the Greck verb dewpeiv, from which the words ‘theoretical’ and 
‘atheoretical’ are derived, originally meant ‘to see’. Heidegger is pointing out that this is 
not what we have in mind in the traditional contrast between the ‘theoretical’ and the 
‘practical’, 

2 ‘Das Werk trägt die Verweisungsganzheit, innerhalb derer das Zeug begegnet.’ In 
this chapter the word ‘Werk’ (‘work’) usually refers to the product achieved by working 
rather than to the process of working as such. We shall as a rule translate ‘Verweisungs- 
ganzheit’ as ‘referential totality’, though sometimes the clumsier ‘totality of assignments’ 
sd convey the idea more effectively. (The older editions read ‘deren’ rather than 
‘derer’.) 


70 


71 


100 Being and Time I.3 


production itself is a using of something for something. In the work there 
is also a reference or assignment to ‘materials’: the work is dependent on 
[angewiesen auf] leather, thread, needles, and the like. Leather, more- 
over is produced from hides. These are taken from animals, which someone 
else has raised. Animals also occur within the world without having been 
raised at all; and, in a way, these entities still produce themselves even 
when they have been raised. So in the environment certain entities become 
accessible which are always ready-to-hand, but which, in themselves, do 
not need to be produced. Hammer, tongs, and needle, refer in themselves 
to steel, iron, metal, mineral, wood, in that they consist of these. In equip- 
ment that is used, ‘Nature’ is discovered along with it by that use—the 
‘Nature’ we find in natural products. 

Here, however, “Nature” is not to be understood as that which is just 
present-at-hand, nor as the power of Nature. The wood is a forest of timber, 
the mountain a quarry of rock; the river is water-power, the wind is wind 
‘in the sails’. As the ‘environment’ is discovered, the ‘Nature’ thus dis- 
covered is encountered too. If its kind of Being as ready-to-hand is dis- 
regarded, this ‘Nature’ itself can be discovered and defined simply in its 
pure presence-at-hand. But when this happens, the Nature which ‘stirs 
and strives’, which assails us and enthralls us as landscape, remains 
hidden. The botanist’s plants are not the flowers of the hedgerow; the 
‘source’ which the geographer establishes for a river is not the ‘springhead 
in the dale’. 

The work produced refers not only to the “towards-which” of its 
usability and the “whereof” of which it consists: under simple craft 
conditions it also has an assignment to the person who is to use it or wear 
it. The work is cut to his figure; he ‘is’ there along with it as the work 
emerges. Even when goods are produced by the dozen, this constitutive 
assignment is by no means lacking; it is merely indefinite, and points to 
the random, the average. Thus along with the work, we encounter not 
only entities ready-to-hand but also entities with Dasein’s kind of Being— 
entities for which, in their concern, the product becomes ready-to-hand; 
and together with these we encounter the worid in which wearers and users 
live, which is at the same time ours. Any work with which one concerns 
oneself is ready-to-hand not only in the domestic. world of the workshop 
but also in the public world, Along with the public world, the envtroning 
Nature [die Umweltnatur] is discovered and is accessible to everyone. In 
roads, streets, bridges, buildings, our concern discovers Nature as having 
some definite direction. A covered railway platform takes account of bad 
weather; an installation for public lighting takes account of the darkness, 
or rather of specific changes in the presence or absence of daylight—the 


I. 3 Being and Time 101 


‘position of the sun’. In a clock, account is taken of some definite con- 
stellation in the world-system. When we look at the clock, we tacitly make 
use of the ‘sun’s position’, in accordance with which the measurement of 
time gets regulated in the official astronomical manner. When we make 
‘use of the clock-equipment, which is proximaily and inconspicuously 
ready-to-hand, the environing Nature is ready-to-hand along with it. Our 
concernful absorption in whatever work-world lies clo “st to us, has a 
function of discovering; and it is essential to this function that, depending 
upon the way in which we are absorbed, those entities within-the-world 
which are brought along [beigebrachte] in the work and with it (that is 
to say, in the assignments or references which are constitutive for it) 
remain discoverable in varying degrees of explicitness and with a varying 
circumspective penetration. 

The kind of Being which belongs to these entities is readiness-to-hand. 
But this characteristic is not to be understood as merely a way of taking 
them, as if we were talking such ‘aspects’ into the ‘entities’ which we 
proximally encounter, or as if some world-stuff which is proximally 
present-at-hand in itself! were ‘given subjective colouring’ in this way. 
Such an Interpretation would overlook the fact that in this case these 
entities would have to be understood and discovered heforehand as 
something purely present-at-hand, and must. have priority and take the 
lead in the sequence of those dealings with the ‘world’ in which something 
is discovered and made one’s own. But this already runs counter to the 
ontological meaning of cognition, which we have exhibited as a founded 
mode of Being-in-the-world.? To lay bare what is just present-at-hand 
and no more, cognition must first penetrate beyond what is ready-to-hand 
in our concern. Readiness-to-hand is the way in which entities as they are ‘in 
themselves’ are defined ontologico-categorially. Yet only by reason of something 
present-at-hand, ‘is there’ anything ready-to-hand. Does it follow, how- 
ever, granting this thesis for the nonce, that readiness-to-hand is onto- 
logically founded upon presence-at-hand ? 

But even if, as our ontological Interpretation proceeds further, readi- 
ness-to-hand should prove itself to be the kind of Being characteristic of 
those entities which are proximally discovered within-the-world, and 
even if its primordiality as compared with pure presence-at-hand can be 
demonstrated, have all these explications been of the slightest help to- 
wards understanding the phenomenon of the world ontologically? In 
Interpreting these entities within-the-world, however, we have always 


1¢ ,, ein zünächst an sich vorhandener Weltstoff . . .? The earlier editions have ‘. .. 
zunächst ein an sich vorhandener Weltstoff.. .”. 


3 See H: 61 above. 


72 


73 


102 Being and Time I. 3 


‘presupposed’ the world. Even if we join them together, we still do not get 
anything like the ‘world’ as their sum. If, then, we start with the Being of 


‘these entities, is there any avenue that will lead us to exhibiting the 


phenomenon of the world?! 


T 16. How the Worldly Character of the Environment Announces itself in Entities 
Within-the-world' 

The world itself is not an entity within-the-world; and yet it is so 
determinative for such entities that only in so far as ‘there is’ a world can 
they be encountered and show themselves, in their Being, as entities 
which have been discovered. But in what way ‘is there’ a world? If 
Dasein is ontically constituted by Beinz-in-the-World, and if an under- 
standing of the Being of its Self belongs just as essentially to its Being, no 


-matter how indefinite that understanding may be, then does not Dasein 


have an understanding of the world—a pre-ontological understanding, 
which indeed can and does get along without explicit ontological insights ? 
With those entities which are encountered within-the-world—that is to 
say, with their character as within-the-world—does not something like 
the world show itself for concernful Being-in-the-world? Do we not have 
a pre-phenomenological glimpse of this phenomenon? Do we not always 
have such a glimpse of it, without having to take it as a theme for onto-. 
logical Interpretation? Has Dasein itself, in the range of its concernful 
absorption in equipment ready-to-hand, a possibility of Being in which 
the worldhood of those entities »sithin-the-world with which it is con- 
cerned is, in a certain way, lit up for it, along with those entities themselves? 
If such possibilities of Being for Dasein can be exhibited within its 
concernful dealings, then the way lies open for studying the phenomenon 
which is thus lit up, and for attempting to ‘hold it at bay’, as it were, and 
to: interrogate it as to those structures which show themselves therein. 
To the everydayness of Being-in-the-world there belong certain modes 
of concern. These permit the entities with which we concern ourselves to 
be encountered in such a way that the worldly character of what is within- 
the-world comes to the fore. When we concern ourselves with something, 
the entities which are most closely ready-to-hand may be met as something 
unusable, not properly adapted for the use we have decided upon. The 
tool turns out to be damaged, or the material unsuitable. In each of these 
cases equipment is here, ready-to-hand. We discover its unusability, how- 
ever, not by looking at it and establishing its properties, but rather by the 
circumspection of the dealings in which we use it. When its unusability is 
thus discovered, equipment becomes conspicuous. This conspicuousness 
1 ‘Die am innerweltlich Seienden sich meldende Weltmässigkeit der Umwelt.’ 


I.3 Being and Time 103 


presents the ready-to-hand equipment as in a certain un-readiness-to- 
hand. But this implies that what cannot be used just lies there; it shows 
itself as an equipmental Thing which looks so and so, and which, in its 
readiness-to-hand as looking that way, has constantly been present-at- 
hand too. Pure presence-at-hand announces itself in such equipment, 
but only to withdraw to the readiness-to-hand of something with which 
one concerns oneself—that is to say, of the sort of thing we find when we 
put it back into repair. This presence-at-hand of something that cannot 
be used is still not devoid of all readiness-to-hand whatsoever; equipment 
which is present-at-hand tn this way is still not just a Thing which occurs 
somewhere. ‘The damage to the equipment is still not a mere alteration of 
a Thing—not a change of properties which just occurs in something 
present-at-hand. 

In our concernful dealings, however, we not only come up against. 
unusable things within what is ready-to-hand already: we also find things 
which are missing—which not only are not ‘handy’ [“‘handlich’’] but 
are not ‘to hand’ [‘‘zur Hand’’] at all. Again, to miss something in 
this way amounts to coming across something un-ready-to-hand. When we 
notice what is un-ready-to-hand, that which is ready-to-hand enters 
the mode of odtrusiveness The more urgently {Je dringlicher] we need what 
is missing, and the more authentically it is encountered in its un-readiness- 
to-hand, all the more obtrusive [um so aufdringlicher] does that which 
is ready-to-hand become—so much so, indeed, that it seems to lose its 
character of readiness-to-hand. It reveals itself as something just present- 
at-hand and no more, which cannot be budged without the thing that is 
missing. The helpless way in which we stand before it is a deficient mode 

‘of concern, and as such it uncovers the Being-just-present-at-hand-and- 
no-more of something ready-to-hand. 

In our dealings with the world! of our concern, the un-ready-to-hand 
can be encountered not only in the sense of that which is unusable or 
simply missing, but as something un-ready-to-hand which is not missing 
at all and not unusable, but which ‘stands in the way’ of our concern. 
That to which our concern refuses to turn, that for which it has ‘no time’, 
is something un-ready-to-hand in the manner of what does not belong 
here, of what has not as yet been attended to. Anything which is un- 
ready-to-hand in this way is disturbing to us, and enables us to see 
the obstinacy of that with which we must concern ourselves in the 
first instance before we do anything else. With this obstinacy, the 
presence-at-hand of the ready-to-hand makes itself known in a new 


1 In the earlier editions ‘Welt’ appears with quotation marks. These are omitted in the 
later editions. 


74 


104 Being and Time 1.3 
way as the Being of that which still lies before us and calls for our 
attending to it.! 

The modes of conspicuousness, obtrusiveness, and obstinacy all have 
the function of bringing to the fore the characteristic of presence-at-hand 
in what is ready-to-hand. But the ready-to-hand is not thereby just 
observed and stared at as something present-at-hand; the presence-at-hand 
which makes itself known is still bound up in the readiness-to-hand of 
equipment. Such equipment still does not veil itself in the guise of mere 
Things. It becomes ‘equipment’ in the sense of something which one 
would like to shove out of the way.? But in such a Tendency to shove 
things aside, the ready-to-hand shows itself as still ready-to-hand in 11s 
unswerving presence-at-hand. 

Now tmt we have suggested, however, that the ready-to-hand is thus 
encountered, under modifications in which its presence-at-hand is revealed, 
how far does this clarify tiie phenomenon of the world? Even in analysing 
these modincations we have uct gone beyond the Being of what is within- 
the-world, and we have come no closer to the world-phenomenon than 
before. But though we have not as yet grasped it, we have brought our- 
selves to a point where we can bring it into view. 

In conspicuousness, odtrusiveness, and obstinacy, that which is ready- 
tu-hand loses its readiness-to-hand in a certain way. But in our dealings 
with what is ready-to-hand, this readiness-to-hand is itself understood, 
though not thematically. It does not vanish simply, but takes its farewell, 
as it were, in the conspicuousness of the unusable. Readiness-to-hand 
still shows itself, and it is precisely here that the worldly character of the 
ready-to-hand shows itself too. 


1 Heidegger’s distinction between ‘conspicuousness’ (Auffälligkeit’; ‘obtrusiveness’ 
(‘Aufdringlichkeit’), and ‘obstinacy’ (‘Aufsassigkeit’) is hard to present unambiguously in 
translation. He seems to have in mind three rather similar situations. In each of these we 
are confronted by a number of articles which are ready-t«-hand. In the first situation we 
wish to use one of these articles for some purpose, but we find that it cannot be used for 
that purpose. It then becomes ‘conspicuous’ or ‘striking , and in a way ‘un-ready-to-hand’ 
—in that we are not able to use it. In the second situation we may have precisely the same 
articles before us, but we want one which is not there. In this case the missing article too 
is ‘un-ready-to-hand’, but in another way—in that it is not there to be used. This is 
annoying, and the articles which are stili ready-to-hand before us, thrust themselves upon 
us in such a way that they become ‘obtrusive’ or even ‘obnoxious’. In the third situation, 
some of the articles which are ready-to-hand before us are experienced as obstacles to the 
achievement of some purpose; as obstacles they are ‘obstinate’, ‘recalcitrant’, ‘refractory’, 
and we have to attend to them or dispose of them in some way before we can finish what 
we want to do. Here again the obstinate objects are un-ready-to-hand, but simply in the 
way of being obstinate. 

In all three situations the articles which are ready-to-hand for us tend to lose their 
readiness-to-hand in one way or another and reveal their presence-at-hand; only in the 
second situation, however, do we encounter them as ‘just present-at-hand and no more’ 
(‘nur noch Vorhandenes’), | 


2 Here ‘Zeug’ is used in the pejorative sense of ‘stuff’. See our note ı, p. 97 on H. 68, 


AS Being and Time 105 
= The structure of the Being of what is ready-to-hand as equipment is 
determined by references or assignments. In a peculiar and obvious 
manner, the “Things’ which are closest to us are ‘in themselve. [‘‘An- 
sich”’]; and they are encountereu as ‘in themselves’ in the concern which. 
makes use of them without noticing them explicitly—the concern which 
can come up against something urusable, When equipment cannot be 
used, this implies that the constitutive assignment of the “‘in-order-to”’ 
to a “towards-this” has been disturbed. The assignments themselves are 
not observed; they are rather ‘there’ when we concernfully submit our- 
selves to them [Sichstellen unter sie]. But when an assienment has been 
disturbed—when something is unusable for some purpose---then the 
assignment becomes explicit. Even now, of course, it has not become 
explicit as an ontological structure; but it has become explicit 
ontically for the circumspection which comes up agzinst the damaging of 
the toci. When an assignment to some particular “towards-t::::"' has been 
thus circum:vectively aroused, we catch sight of the “terrae tan” itself 
and along with it everything connecied with the work -=the v nole “work- 
shop’—as thet wherein concern always dwells. The context of equipment 
is ht wp, not as something never seen before, but as a totality constantly 
sighted beiorehaid in circurmspection. With this totality, however, the 
world announces ‘self, 

Similarly, when something ready-to-hand is found missing, thongh its 
everyday presenc» [Zugegensein| has been sc obvious that we have never 
taken any notice of it, this makes a breast in those referential contexts 
which circumspection discovers. Our circumspection comics up against 
emptiness, and now sees for the first time what the missing article was 
ready-to-hand with, and what it was ready-to-hand fur. The environment 
announces itself afresh. What is thus lit up is not itself Just one thing ready- 
to-hand among others; still iess is it something present-al-hand upon 
which equip:nent ready-to-hand is somehow founded: it is in the 
‘there’ before anyone has observed or ascertained it. It is itself 
inaccessible to circumspection, so far as circumspection is always directed 
towards entities; but in each case it has already been disclosed for cir- 
cumspection, ‘Disclose’ and ‘disclosedness’ will be used as technica! terms 
iv the passages that follow, and shall signify ‘to lay open’ and ‘the charac- 
ter of having been laid open.’ Thus ‘to disclose’ never means anything 
like ‘to obtain indirectly by inference’.! 


1 In ordinary Gi: man usage, the verb ‘erschliessen’ may mean not only to ‘disclose’ 
but also-—in certaip, constructions—to ‘infer’ or ‘conclude’ in the sense in which one ‘infers’ 
a couclusion fror; premisses. Heidegger is deliberately ruling out this latter interpretation, 
though on 2 very few occasions he may use the word in this sense. He explains his own 
meaning by the cognate verb ‘aufschliessen’, to ‘lay open’. To say that something has 
beer. “disclosed” or ‘Haid open’ in Heidegger’s sense, does not mean that one has any 


76 


106 Being and Time I. 3 


That the world does not ‘consist’ of the ready-to-hand shows itself in 
the fact (among others) that whenever the world is lit up in the modes of 
concern which we have been Interpreting, the ready-to-hand becomes 
deprived of its worldhood so that Being-just-present-at-hand comes to the 
fore. If, in our everyday concern with the ‘environment’, it is to be possible 
for equipment ready-to-hand to be encountered in its “Being-in-itself’ 
[in seinem “An-sich-sein’’], then those assignments and referential 
totaiities in which our circumspection ‘is absorbed’ cannot become a 
theme for that circumspection any more than they can for grasping 
things ‘thematically’ but non-circumspectively. If it is to be possible for 
the ready-to-hand not to emerge from its inconspicuousness, the world 
must not announce itself. And it is in this that the Being-in-itself of entities 
which are ready-to-hand has its pheneniens structure constituted. 

In such privative expressions as “inconspicuousness”, “unobtrusive- 
ness”, and ‘‘non-obstinacy”, what we have in view is a positive pheno- 
menal character of the Being of that which is proximally ready-to-hand. 
With these negative prefixes we have in view the character of the ready- 
to-hand as “holding itself in”; this is what we have our eye upon in the 
*Being-in-itself” of something,’ though ‘proximally’ we ascribe it to the 
present-at-hand—to the present-at-hand as that which can be themat- 
cally ascertained. As long as we take our orientation primarily and ex- 
clusively from the present-at-hand, the ‘in-itself’ can by no means be 
ontologically clarified. If, however, this talk about the ‘in-itself” has any 
ontological importance, some interpretation must be called for. This 
*in-itself” of Being is something. which gets invoked with considerable 
emphasis, mostly in an ontical way, and rightly so from a phenomenal 
standpoint. But if some ontological assertion is supposed to be given when 
this is ontically invoked, its claims are not fulfilled by such a procedure. As 
the foregoing analysis has already made clear, only on the basis of the 
phenomenon of the world can the Being-in-itself of entities within-the- 
world be grasped ontologically. 

But if the world can, in a way, be lit up, it must assuredly be disclosed. 
And it has already been disclosed beforehand whenever what is ready-to- 
hand within-the-world is accessible for circumspective concern. The world 
is therefore something ‘wherein’ Dasein as an entity already was, and if in 
detailed awareness of the contents which are thus ‘disclosed’, but rather that th a 
been ‘laid open’ to us as implicit in what is given, so that they thay be made explici 


our awareness by further analysis or discrimination of the given, rather than by = 
inference from it. 
1 “Diese “Un” meinen den Charakter des Ansichhaltens des Zuhandenen, das, was wir 
ne im Fuge haben. - The point seems to be that when we of 
something ‘as it is “in itself” or "in its own right” ’, we think of it as ‘holding i in’ or 
‘holding itself back’—not ‘stepping forth’ or doing something ‘ out of character’. 


1.3 Being and Time 107 
any manner it explicitly comes away from anything, it can never do more 
than come back to the world. | 

Being-in-the-world, according to our Interpretation hitherto, amounts 
to a non-thematic circumspective absorption in references or assignments 
constitutive for the readiness-to-hand of a totality of equipment. Any 
concern is already as it is, because of some familiarity with the world. 
In this familiarity Dasein can lose itself in what it encounters within-the- 
world and be fascinated with it. What is it that Dasein is familiar with? 
Why. can the worldly character of what is within-the-world be lit up? 
The presence-at-hand! of entities is thrust to the fore by the possible 
breaks in :that referential totality in which circumspection ‘operates’; 
how are we to get a closer understanding of this totality? 

These questions are aimed at working out both the phenomenon and 
the problems of worldhood, and they call for an inquiry into the inter- 
connections with which certain structures are built up. To answer them 
we must analyse these structures more concretely. 


q 17. Reference and Signs 

In our provisional Interpretation of that structure of Being which 
belongs to the ready-to-hand (to ‘equipment’), the phenomenon of refer- 
ence or assignment became visible; but we merely gave an indication of 
it, and in so sketchy a form that we at once stressed the necessity of 
uncovering it with regard to its ontological origin.* It became plain, 
moreover, that assignments and referential totalities could in some sense 
become constitutive for worldhood itself. Hitherto we have seen the world 
lit up only in and for certain definite ways in which we concern ourselves 
environmentally with the ready-to-hand, and indeed it has been lit up 
only with the readiness-to-hand of that concern. So the further we proceed 
in understanding the Being of entities within-the-world, the broader and 
firmer becomes the phenomenal basis on which the world-phenomenon 
may be laid bare. 

We shall again take as our point of departure the Being of the ready- 
to-hand, but this time with the purpose of grasping the phenomenon of 
weference or assignment itself more precisely. We shall accordingly attempt an 
ontological analysis of a kind of equipment in which one may come across 
such ‘references’ in more senses than one. We come across ‘equipment’ 
in signs. The word “‘sign” designates many kinds of things: not only may it 
stand for different kinds of signs, but Being-a-sign-for can itself be 


a Zoe the alder editions have ‘Zuhandenheit’ where the newer ones have ‘Vorhan- 
ext. K 


2 Cf. H. 68 above. . 


i 


77 


8 


108 Being and Time 1. 3 


formalized as a universal kind of relation, so that the sign-strutture itself 
provides an ontological clue for ‘characterizing’ any entity whatsoever. 

But signs,-in the first instance, are themselves items of equipment whose 
specific character as equipment consists in showing or indicating.! We find 
such signs in signposts, boundary-stones, the ball for the mariner’s storm- 
warning, signals, banners, signs of mourning, and the like. Indicating can 
be defined as a ‘kind’ of referring. Referring is, if we take it as formally 
as possible, a relating. But relation does not function as a genus for ‘kinds’ 
or ‘species’ of references which may somehow become differentiated as 
sign, symbol, expression, or signification. A relation is something quite 
formal which may be read off directly by way of ‘formalization’ from any 
kind of context, whatever its subject-matter or its way of Being." 

_ Every reference is a relation, but not every relation is a reference. 
Every ‘indication’ is a reference, but not every referring is an indicating. 
This implies at the same time that every ‘indication’ is a relation, but not 
every relation is an indicating. The formally general character of relation 
is thus brought to light. If we are to investigate such phenomena as refer- 
ences, signs, or even significations, nothing is to be gained by characteriz- 
ing them as relations. Indeed we shall eventually have to show that 
‘relations’ themselves, because of their formally general character, have 
their ontological source in a reference. 

If the present analysis is to be confined to the Interpretation of the sign 
as distinct from the phenomenon of reference, then even within this 
limiiation we cannot properly investigate the full multiplicity of possible 
signs. Among signs there are symptoms [Anzeichen], warning signals, 


signs of things that have happened already [Rückzeichen], signs to mark 


something, signs by which things are recognized; these have different 
ways of indicating, regardless of what may be serving as such a sign. 
From such ‘signs’ we must distinguish traces, residues, commemorative 
monuments, documents, testimony, symbols, expressions, appearances, 
significations. These phenomena can easily be formalized because of their 
formal relational character; we find it especially tempting nowadays to 
take such a ‘relation’ as a clue for subjecting every entity to a kind of 
‘Interpretation’ which always ‘fits’ because at bottom it says nothing, no 


‘more than the facile schema of content and form. 


As an example of a sign we have chosen one which we shall use again 
in a later analysis, though in another regard. Motor cars are some- 
times fiticd up with an adjustable red arrow, whose position indicates 


if... deren spezifischer Zeugcharakter im Zeigen besteht.” While we have often used 
‘show’ and ‘indicate’ to translate ‘zeigen’ and ‘anzeigen’ respectively, in the remainder of 
this section] it seems more appropriate to translate ‘zeigen’ by ‘incivate’, or to resort to 
hendiadys.as tn the present passage. 


I. 3 Being and Time 109 
the direction the vehicle wil! take—at an intersection, for instance. The 
position of the arrow is controlled by the driver. This sign is an item of 
equipment which is ready-to-hand for the driver in his concern with 
driving, and not for him alone: those who are not travelling with him— 
and they in particular—also make use of it, either by giving way on the 
proper side or by stopping. This sign is ready-to-hand within-the-world 
in the whole equipment-context of vehicles and traffic regulations. It is 
equipment for indicating, and as equipment, it is constituted by reference 
or assignment. It has the character of the “‘in-order-to’’, its own definite 
serviceability ; it is for indicating.’ This indicating which the sign performs 
can be taken as a kind of ‘referring’. But here we must notice that this 


‘referring’ as indicating is not the ontological structure of the sign as 
equipment. 


Instead, ‘refering’ as indicating is grounded in the Being-structure of 


equipment, in serviceability for. ... But an entity may have serviceability 
without thereby becoming a sign. As equipment, a ‘hammer’ too is 
constituted by a serviceability, but this does not make it a sign. Indicating, 
as a ‘reference’, is a way in which the “‘towards-which” of a service- 
ability becomes ontically concrete; tt determines an item of equipment 
as for. this “towards-which” [und bestimmt ein Zeug zu diesem]. On the 
other hand, the kind of reference we get in ‘serviceability-for’, is an 
ontologico-categorial attribute of equipment as equipment. That the 
“toawards-which” of serviceability should acquire its concreteness in 
indicating, is an accident of its equipment-constitution as such. In this 
example of a sign, the difference between the reference of serviceability 
and the reference of indicating becomes visible in a rough and ready 
fashion. These are so far from coinciding that only when they are united 
does the concreteness of a definite kind of equipment become possible. 
Now it is certain that indicating differs in principle from reference as a 
constitutive state of equipment; it is just as incontestable that the sign in 
its turn is related in a peculiar and even distinctive way to the kind of 
Being which belongs to whatever equipmental totality may be ready-to- 
hand in the environment, and to its worldly character. In our concernful 


1 ‘Es hat den Charakter des Um-zu, seine bestiiumte Dioni keit, es ict an n Zeigen, 


The verb dienen‘, is often followed by an inhi “ive comucton intr. ‘uced by the 
preposition ‘zu’. Similarly the English í serve’ ca’ te followed by an ic’ Jee in such 
expressions as ‘it serves to indicate...’ In ee ee faewinan (he “zw. ee 18 
carried over to the noun ‘Dienlichkel’ : the COMES ores. oun ‘servicea! woe’, however, 
is not normally followed by an infin: tive, but sat ses reson int uaced by ‘for’ 
e.g. ‘serviceability for indicating . ’ Since the pi Hays an iv ortant role in 
this section and the next, ii w ould be desirable to pee „u ni trans;='ion for it. We 


shail, nowever, translate it a> ‘lor’ in such exprorsior am a zu‘. i «t as ‘towards’ 


in such expressions as Woz’ (‘towards-which’) ad ‘Lecu’ (‘to wards-tais’), retaining 
“in-order-to’ for ‘Um-zv’. 


Ba 


110 Being and Time I. 3. 
dealings, equipment for indicating [Zeig-zeug] gets used in a very special 
way. But simply to establish this Fact is ontologically insufficient. The 
basis and the meaning of this special status must be clarified. 

What do we mean when we say that a sign “indicates” ? We can answer 
this only by determining what kind of dealing is appropriate with equip- 
ment for indicating. And we must do this in such a way that the readiness- 
to-hand of that equipment can be genuinely grasped. What is the appro- 
priate way of having-to-do with signs? Going back to our example of the 
arrow, we must say that the kind of behaving (Being) which corresponds 
to the sign we encounter, is either to ‘give way” or to ‘stand still’ vis-d-vis 
the car with the arrow. Giving way, as taking a direction, belongs essen- 
tially to Dasein’s Being-in-the-world. Dasein is always somehow directed 
[ausgerichtet] and on its way; standing and waiting are only limiting cases 
of this directional ‘on-its-way’. The sign addresses itself to a Being-in-the- 
world which is specifically ‘spatial’. The sign is not authentically ‘grasped’ 
!“‘erfasst”’] if we just stare at it and identify it as an indicator-Thing which 
szcurs. Even if we turn our glance in the direction which the arrow indic- 
ates, and look at something present-at-hand in the region indicated, even 
then the sign is not authentically encountered. Such a sign addresses 
itself to the circumspection of our concernful dealings, and it does so in 
such a way that the circumspection which goes along with it, following 
where it points, brings into an explicit ‘survey’ whatever aroundness the 
environment may have at the time. This circumspective survey does not 
grasp the ready-to-hand; what it achieves is rather an orientation within 
our environment. There is also another way in which we can expertence 
equipment: we may encounter the arrow simpiy as equipment which 
belongs to the car. We can do this without discovering what character it 
specifically !:as as equipment: what the arrow is to indicate and how it is 
te do so, may remain completely undetermined; yet what we are encoun- 
tering is not à incre Thing. The experiencing of a Thing requires a definite- 
ness of its own [ihre eigene Bestimmtheit}, and must be contrasted with 
coming across a manifold of equipment,.which may often be quite 
indefinite, even when one comes across it as especially close. 

Signs of the kind we have described iet what is ready-to-hand be 
encountered ; more precisely, they let some context of it become accessible 
ia such a way that our conoernful dealings take on an orientation and hold 
it secure. A sign is not a Thing which stands to another Thing in che 

eialionship of indicating; it is rather an item of equipment which explicitly 
raises a totality of equipment into our circumspection so that together with it the 
wur dly character of the ready-to-hand announces itself. Inasymptomor a warningy 
signal, ‘what ia coming’ ‘indicates itself’, but not in the sense of something”: 


- 


I. 3 Being and Time 111 


merely occurring, which comes as an addition to what is already present- 
at-hand; ‘what is coming’ is the sort of thing which we are ready for, or 
which we ‘weren’t ready for’ if we have been attending to something else.! 
In signs of something that has happened already, what has come to pass 
and run its course becomes circumspectively accessible. A sign to mark 
something indicates what one is ‘at’ at any time. Signs always indicate 
primarily ‘wherein’ one lives, where one’s concern dwells, what sort of 
involvement there is with something.? 

The peculiar character of signs as equipment becomes especially clear 
in ‘establishing a sign’ [“‘Zeichenstiftung’’]. This activity is performed in 
a circumspective fore-sight [Vorsicht] out of which it arises, and which 
requires that it be possible for one’s particular environment to announce 
itself for circumspection at any time by means of something reaay-to- 
hand, and that this possibility should itself be ready-to-hand. But the 
Being of what is most closely ready-to-hand within-the-world possesses 
the character of holding-itself-in and not emerging, which we have 
described above.? Accordingly our circumspective dealings in the environ- 
ment require some equipment ready-to-hand which in its character as 
equipment takes over the ‘work’ of letting something ready-to-hand become 
conspicuous. So when such equipment (signs) gets produced, its conspicuous- 
ness must be kept in mind. But even when signs are thus conspicuous, one 
does not let them be present-at-hand at random; they get ‘set up’ 
[‘‘anzebracht”’] in a definite way with a view towards easy accessibility. 

In establishing a sgn, however, one does not necessarily have to pro- 
duce equipment whic’) is not yet ready-to-hand at all. Signs also arise 
when one fakes as a sign [Zum-Zeichen-nehmen] something that is ready-to- 
hand already. In this mode, signs “get established” in a sense which is 
even more primordial. In indicating, a ready-to-hand equipment totality, 
and even the environment in general, can be provided with an availability 
which is circumspectively oriented; and not only this: establishing a sign 
can, above all, reveal. What gets taken as a sign becomes accessible only 
through its readiness-to-hand. If, for instance, the south wind ‘is accepted’ 
[‘‘gilt’’] by the farmer as a sign of rain, then this ‘acceptance’ (‘‘Geltung’’] 
—or the ‘value’ with which the entity is ‘invested’—is not a sort of bonus 
over and above what is already present-at-hand in itself—viz, the flow of 
air in a definite geographical direction. The south wind may be meter.ro- 
logically accessible as something which just occurs; but it is never present- 


1° ,. das “was kommt” ist solches, darauf wir uns gefasst machen, bzw. “nicht gefasst 
waren”, sofern wir uns mit anderem befassten.’ 

8 ‘Das Merkzeichen zeigt, “woran” man jeweils ist. Die Zeichen zeigen primär immer 
das, “worin” man lebt, wobei das Besorgen sich aufhal!, welche Bewandtnis es uxriit 
hat.’ On “Bewandtnis’, see note 2, p. 115 H. 84 below. 

* See H. 75-76 above. | 


— a. 


81 


112 Being and Time 1.3 


at-hand froximally in such a way as this, only occasionally taking over the 
function of a warning signal. On the contrary, only by the circumspection 
with which one takes account of things in farming, is the south wind 
discovered in its Being. 

But, one will protest, that which gets taken as a sign must first have 
become accessible in itself and been apprehended before the sign gets 
established. Certainly it must in any case be such that in some way we 
can come across it: The question simply remains as to how entities are dis- 
covered in this previous encountering, whether as mere Things which 
occur, or rather as equipment which has not been understood—as some- 
thing ready-to-hand with which we have hitherto not known ‘how to 
begin’, and which has accordingly kept itself veiled from the purview of 
circumhspection, And here again, when the equipmental characters of the ready-to- 
hand are still circumspectively undiscovered, they are not to be Interpreted as bare 
Thinghood presented for an apprehension of what is just present-at-hand and no 
more. 

The Being-ready-to-hand of signs in our everyday dealings, and the 
conspicuousness which belongs to signs and which may be produced for 
various purposes and in various ways, do not merely serve to document 
the inconspicuousness constitutive for what is most closely ready-to-hand ; 
the sign itself gets its conspicuousness from the inconspicuousness of the 
equipmerital totality, which is ready-to-hand and ‘obvious’ in its everyday- 
ness. The knot which one ties in a handkerchief [der bekannte “Knopf im 
Taschentuch’’] as a sign to mark something is an example of this. What 
such a sign is to indicate is always something with which one has to 
concern oneself in one’s everyday circumspection. Such a sign can 
indicate many things, and things of the most various kinds. The wider 
the extent to which it can indicate, the narrower its intelligibility and its 
usefulness. Not only is it, for the most part, ready-to-hand as a sign only 
for the person who ‘establishes’ it, but it can even become inaccessible to 
him, so that another sign is needed if the first is to be used circumspec- 
tively at all. So when the knot cannot be used as a sign, it does not lose 
its sign-character, but it acquires the disturbing obtrusiveness of something 
most closely ready-to-hand. 

One might be tempted to cite the abundant use of ‘signs’ in primitive 
Dasein, as in fetishism and magic, 40 illustrate the remarkable role 
which they play in everyday concern when it comes to our understanding 
of the world. Certainly the establishment of signs which underlies this 
way of using them is not performed with any theoretical aim or in the 
course of theoretical speculation. This way of using them always remains 
completely within a Being-in-the-world which is ‘immediate’. But on 


I. 3 Being and Time 113 


closer inspection it becomes plain that to interpret fetishism and 
magic by taking qur clue from the idea of signs in general, is not enough 
to enable us to grasp the kind of ‘Being-ready-to-hand’ which belongs to 
entities encountered in the primitive world. With regard to the sign- 
phenomenon, the following Interpretation may be given: for primitive 
man, the sign coincides with that which is indicated. Not only can the 
sign represent this in the sense of serving as a substitute for what it indic- 
ates, but it can do so in such a way that the sign itself always es what it 
indicates. This remarkable coinciding does not mean, however, that the 
sign-Thing has already undergone a certain ‘Objectification’—that it has 
been experienced as a mere Thing and misplace ] into the same realm of 
Being of the present-at-hand as what it indicates. This ‘coinciding’ is not 
an identification of things which have hitherto been isolated from each 
other: it consists rather in the fact that the sign has not as yet become free 
from that of which it is a sign. Such a use of signs is still absorbed com- 
pletely in Being-towards what is indicated, so that a sign as such cannot 
detach itself at all. This coinciding is based not on a prior Objectification 
but on the fact that such Objectification is completely lacking. This means, 
however, that signs are not discovered as equipment at all—that ultimately 
what is ‘ready-to-hand’ within-the-world just does not have the kind of 
Being that belongs to equipment. Perhaps even readiness-to-hand and 
equipment have nothing to contribute [nichts auszurichten] as ontological 
clues in Interpreting the primitive world; and certainly the ontology of 
Thinghood does even less. But if an understanding of Being is constitutive 
‘for primitive Dasein and for the primitive world in general, then it is all 
the more urgent to work out the ‘formal’ idea of worldhood—or at least 
the idea of a phenomenon modifiable in such a way that all ontological 
assertions to the effect that in a given phenomenal context something is 
not yet such-and-such or no longer such-and-such, may acquire a positive 
phenomenal meaning in terms of what it is not.} 

The foregoing Interpretation of the sign should merely provide phe- 
nomenal support for our characterization of references or assignments. 
The relation between sign and reference is threefold. 1. Indicating, as a 
way whereby the “towards-which” of a serviceability can become con- 
crete, is founded upon the equipment-structure as such, upon the “in- 
order-to” (assignment). 2. The indicating which the sign does is an 
equipmental character of something ready-to-hand, and as such it belongs 
to a totality of equipment, to a context of assignments or refercnces. 
3. The sign is not only ready-to-hand with other equipment, but in its 

-readiness-to-hand the environment becomes in each case explicitly 


1° ,, aus dem, was es nicht ist.” The older editions write ‘was’ for ‘was’. 


82 


114 Being and Time I. 3 
accessible for circumspection. A sign is something ontically ready-to-hand, 
which functions both as this def vite equipment and as something indicative of 
[was . . . anzeigt] the ontological structure of readiness-to-hand, of referential 
totalities, and of worldhood. Here is rooted the special status of the sign as 
something ready-to-hand in that environment with which we concern 
ourselves circumspectively. Thus the reference or the assignment itself 
cannot be conceived as a sign of it is to serve ontologically as the founda! 
tion upon which signs are based. Reference is not an ontical characteristic 
of something ready-to-hand, when it is rather that by which readiness- 
to-hand itself is constituted. 

In what sense, then, is reference ‘presupposed’ ontologically in the 
ready-to-hand, and to what extent is it, as such an ontological foundation, 
at the same time constitutive for worldhood in general ? 


S 18. Involvement and Significance; the Worldhood of the World 


The ready-to-hand is encountered within-the-world. The Being of this 
entity, readiness-to-hand, thus stands in some ontdlogical relationship 
towards the world and towards worldhood. In anything ready-to-hand 
the world is always ‘there’. Whenever we encounter anything, the world 
has already been previously discovered, though not thematically, But it 
can also be lit up in certain ways of dealing with our environment. ‘fhe 
world is that in terms of which the ready-to-hand is ready-to-hand. How 
can the world let the ready-to-hand be encountered? Our analysis 
hitherto has shown that what we encounter within-the-world has, in its 
very Being, been freed! for our concernful circumspection, for taking 
account. What does this previous freeing amount to, and how is this to 
be understood as an ontclogicaHy distinctive feature of the world? What 
problems does the question of the worldhood of the world lay before us? 

We have indicated that the state which is constitutive for tue ready-to- 
hand as equipment is one of reference or assignment. How can entities 
with this kind of Being be freed by the world with regard to their Being? 
Why are these the first entities to be encountered? As definite kinds of 
references we have mentioned serviceability-for-, detrimentality [Abtrag- 
lichkeit], usability, and the like. The “towards-which” [das Wozu] of a 
serviceability and the ‘‘for-which” [das Wofür] of a usability prescribed 
the ways in which such a reference or assignment can become concrete. 
But the ‘indicating’ of the sign and the ‘hammering’ of the hammer are 
not properties of entities. Indeed, they are not properties at all, if the 
ar structure designated by the term ‘property’ is that of some. © 


1 ‘freigegeben’. The idea seems to be that what we encounter has, as it were, beem 
released, set free, given its freedom, or given free rein, so that our circumspection can take% 
account of it. 


-e ^ 


1.3 Being and Time 115 
definite character which it is possible for Things to possess [einer mögli- 
chen Bestimmtheit von Dingen]. Anything ready-to-hand is, at the worst, 
appropriate for some purposes and inappropriate for others; and its 
‘properties’ are, as it were, still bound up in these ways in which it is 
appropriate or inappropriate,! just as presence-at-hand, as a possible 
kind of Being for something ready-to-hand, is bound up in readiness-to- 
hand. Serviceability too, however, as a constitutive state of equipment 
(and serviceability is a reference), is not an appropriateness of some 
entity; it is rather the condition (so far as Being is in question) which 
makes it possible for the character of such an entity to be defined by its 
appropriatenesses. But what, then, is “reference” or “assignment” to 
mean? To say that the Being of tne ready-to-hand has the structure of 
assignment or reference means that it has in itself the character of having 
been assigned or referred | Verwiesenheit]. An entity is discovered when it has 
been assigned or referred to something, and referred as that entity which 
it is. With any such entity there is an involvement which it has im some- 
thing.” The character of, Being which belongs to the ready-to-hand is 
just such an involvement. If something has an involvement, this implies 
letting it be involved in something. The relationship of the ‘with... in...” 
shall be indicated by the term “assignment” or “reference”.? 


1 The words ‘property’ and ‘appropriateness’ reflect the etymological connection of 
Heidegger’s ‘Eigenschaft’ and “Geeignetheit’. 
3 ‘Es hat mit ihm bei etwas sein Bewenden.’ The terms ‘Bewenden’ and ‘Bewandtnis’ are 
omens the nost difficult for the translator. Their root meaning has to do with the way 
something is already ‘iming’ when one lets it ‘go its own way’, ‘run its course’, follow 
its ‘bent’ or ‘tendency’, or finish ‘what it is about’, ‘what it is up to’ or ‘what it is 
involved in’. The German expressions, however, have no simple English equivalents, 
but are restricted to a rather special group of idioms such as the following, which we 
have taken from Wildhagen and Héraucourt’s admirable English-German, German-English 
Dictionary (Volume II, Wiesbaden 1953): ‘es dabei bewenden lassen’—'to leave it at 
that, to let it go at that, to let it rest there’; ‘und dabei hatte essein Bewenden’— and 
there the matter ended’; ‘dabei muss es sein Bewenden haben’—*there the matter must 
rest’— "that must suffice’; ‘die Sache hat eine’ ganz andere Bewandtnis’—‘the case is 
quite different’; ‘damit hat es seine besondere Bewandtnis’—‘there is something peculiar 
about it; thereby hangs a tale’; ‘damit hat est folgende Bewandtnis’—‘the matter 
is as follows’. a . | 
We have tried to render both ‘Bewenden’ and .’Bewandtnis’ by expressions including 
either ‘involve’ or ‘involvement’. But the contexts into which these words can easily be 
fitted in ordinary English do not correspond very well to those which are possible for 
‘Bewenden’ and ‘Bewandtnis’. Our task is further complicated by the emphasis which 
Heidegger gives to the prepositions ‘mit’ and ‘bei’ in connection with “Bewenden’ and 
‘Bewandtnis’. In passages such as the present one, it would be more idiomatic to h-sve 
these prepositions untranslated and simply write: ‘Any such entity is involved in doing 
mehine, or ‘Any such entity is involved in some activity’. But ‘mit’ and ‘bei’ receive so 
much attention in this connection that in contexts such as this we shall sometimes translate 
them as ‘with’ and ‘in’, though elsewhere we shall handle ‘bei’ very differently. (The 
reader must bear in mind that the kind of ‘involvement’ with which we are here concerned 
is always an involvement in some activity, which one is performing, not an involvement 
in circumstances in which one is ‘caught’ or ‘entangled’.) a 
3 ‘In Bewandtnis liegt: bewenden lassen mit etwas bei etwas. Der Bezug des “mut 


116 Being and Time I.3 


When an entity within-the-world has already been proximally freed 
for its Being, that Being is its “involvement”. With any such entity as 
entity, there is some involvement. The fact that it has such an involvement 
is ontologically definitive for the Being of such an entity, and is not an 
ontical assertion about it. That in which it is involved is the “‘towards- 
which” of serviceability, and the “for-which” of usability.! With the 
“towards-which” of serviceability there can again be an involvement: 
with this thing, for instance, which is ready-to-hand, and which we 
accordingly call a “hammer”, there is an involvement in hammering; 
with hammering, there is an involvement in making something fast; 
with making something fast, there is an involvement in protection against 
bad weather; and this protection ‘is’ for the sake of [um-willen] providing 
shelter for Dasein—that is to say, for the sake of a possibility of Dasein’s 
Being. Whenever something ready-to-hand has an involvement with it, 
what involvement this is, has in each case been outlined in advance in 
terms of the totality of such involvements. In a workshop, for example, the 
totality of involvements which is constitutive for the ready-to-hand in its 
readiness-to-hand, is ‘earlier’ than any single item of equipment; so too 
for the farmstead with all its utensils and outlying lands. But the totality 
of involvements itself goes back ultimately to a ‘‘towards-which” in 
which there is no further involvement: this ‘‘towards-which”’ 1s not an 
entity with the kind of Being that belongs to what is ready-to-hand within 
a world; it is rather an entity whose Being is defined as Being-in-the- 
world, and to whose state of Being, worldhood itself belongs. This primary 
“‘towards-which” is not just another ““towards-this’” as something in which 
an involvement is possible. The primary ‘towards-which’ is a ‘‘for-the- 
sake-of-which”.? But the ‘for-the-sake-of’ always pertains to the Being of 


... bei...” soll durch den Terminus Verweisung angezeigt werden.” Here the point seems 
to be that if something has an ‘involvement’ in the sense of ‘Bewandtnis’ (or rather, if 
there is such an involvement ‘with’ it), the thing which has this involvement has been 
Roi ead or ‘referred’ for 4 certain activity or purpose ‘in’ which it may be said to be 
involved. 

1 ‘Bewandtnis ist das Sein des innerweltlichen Seienden, darauf es je schon zunächst 
freigegeben ist. Mit ihm als Seisndem hat e je eine Bewandtnis. Dieses, dass es eine 
Bewandtnis hat, ist die onfolog:::he Bestimmung des Seins dieses Seienden, nicht eine 
ontische Aussage über das Seiende. Das Wobei es die Bewandinis hat, ist das Wozu der 
Dienlichkeit, das Wofür der Verwendbarkeit.’ This passage and those which follow are 
hard to translate because Heidegger is using three carefully differentiated prepositions 
(‘zu’, ‘fur’, and ‘auf’) where English idiom needs only ‘for’. We can say that something is 
serviceable, usable, or applicable ‘for’ a p ` and that it may be freed or given free 
rein ‘for’ some kind of activity. In German, however, it will be said to have ‘Dienlichkeit 
zu..., Verwendbarkeit für... .’; and it will be ‘freigegeben auf. ..’. In the remainder of 
this section we shall use ‘for’ both for ‘fiir’ anc ior ‘auf’ as they occur in these expressions; 
we shall, however, continue to use ‘towards-which’ for the ‘Wozu’ of ‘Dienlichkeit’. See 
note t, p. 109, H. 78 above. l 


2 ‘Dieses primäre Wozu ist kein Dazu als mögliches Wobei einer Bewandtnis. Das 
primäre “Wozu” ist ein Worum-willen.’ 


I. 3 Being and Time 117 
Dasein, for which, in its Being, that very Being is essentially an issue. We 
have thus indicated the interconnection by which the structure of an 
involvement. leads to Dasein’s very Being as the sole authentic ‘‘for-the- 
sake-of-which” ; for the present, however, we shall pursue this no further. 
‘Letting something be involved’ must first be clarified enough to give the 
phenomenon of worldhood the kind of definiteness which makes it possible 
to formulate any problems about it. l 

Ontically, “letting something be involved” signifies that within our 
factical concern we let something ready-to-hand be so-and-so as it is 
already and in order that it be such.! The way we take this ontical sense of 
‘letting be’ is, in principle, ontological. And therewith we Interpret the 
meaning of previously freeing what is proximally ready-to-hand within- 
the-world. Previously letting something ‘be’ does not mean that we must 
first bring it into its Being and produce it; it means rather that something 
which 1s already an ‘entity’ must be discovered in its readiness-to-hand, 
and that we must thus let the entity which has this Being be encountered. 
This ‘a priori’ letting-something-be-involved is the condition for the 
possibility of encountering anything ready-to-hand, so that Dasein, in its 
ontical dealings with the entity thus encountered, can thereby let it be 
involved in the ontical sense.” On the other hand, if letting something 
be involved is understood ontologically, what is then pertinent is the 
freeing of everything ready-to-hand as ready-to-hand, no matter whether, 
taken ontically, it is involved thereby, or whether it 1s rather an entity of 
precisely such a sort that ontically it is not involved thereby. Such entities 
are, proximally and for the most part, those with which we concern 
ourselves when we do not let them ‘be’ as we have discovered that they 
are, but work upon them, make improvements in them, or smash them 
to pieces. 

When we speak of having already let something be involved, so that it 
has been freed for that involvement, we are using a perfect tense a priort 
which characterizes the kind of Being belonging to Dasein itself.? Letting 
an entity be involved, if we understand this ontologically, consists in 
previously freeing it for [auf] itsreadiness-to-hand within the environment. 
When we let something be involved, it must be involved in something; 
and in terms of this ‘‘in-which”, the “with-wluch” of this involvement 


1 ’Bewendenlassen bedcutet ontisch; innerhalb eines faktischen Besorgens ein Zuhan- 
denes so und so sein lassen, wie es nunmehr ist und damit es so ist.’ 

3°, es im ontischen Sinne dabei bewenden lassen kann.’ While we have translated 
‘dabei’ simply as ‘thereby’ in this context, it is possible that it should have been construed 
rather as an instance of the special use of ‘bei’ with ‘bewenden lassen’. A similar ambiguity 
occurs in the following sentence. 

3‘Das auf Bewandtnis hin freigebende Je-schon-haben-bewenden-lassen ist ein 
apriorisches Perfekt, das die Seinsart des Daseins selbst charakterisiert. 


85 


bb 


118 Being and Time 1.3 


is freed.! Our concern encounters it as this thing that is ready-to-hand. 
To the extent that any entity shows itself to concern’—that is, to the 
extent that it is discovered in its Being—it is already something ready- 
to-hand environmentally; it just is not ‘proximally’ a ‘world-stuff’ that 
is merely present-at-hand. : 

As the Being of something ready-to-hand, an involvement is itself. 
discovered only on the basis of the prior discovery of a totality of involve- 
ments. So in any involvement that has been discovered (that is, in any- 
thing ready-to-hand which we encounter), what we have called the 
“worldly character” of the ready-to-hand has been discovered before- 
hand, In this totality of involvements which has been discovered before- 
hand, there lurks an ontological relationship to the world. In letting 
entities be involved so that they are freed for a totality of involvements, 
one must have disclosed already that for which [woraufhin] they have been 
freed. But that for which something environmentally ready-to-hand 
has thus been freed (and indeed in such a manner that it becomes 
accessible as an entity within-the-world first of all), cannot itself be con- 
ceived as an entity with this discovered kind of Being. It is essentially not 
discoverable, if we henceforth reserve ““discoveredness” as a term for a 
possibility of Being which every entity without the character of Dasein may 
possess. 

But what does it mean to say that that for which® entities within-the- 
world are proximally freed must have been previously disclosed? To 
Dasein’s Being, an understanding of Being belongs. Any understanding 
[Verständnis] has its Being in an act of understanding [Verstehen]. 
If Being-in-the-world is a kind of Being which is essentially befitting to 
Dasein, then to understand Being-in-the-world belongs to the essential 
content of its understanding of Being. The previous disclosure of that for 
which what we encounter within-the-world is subsequently freed,‘ 
amounts to nothing else than understanding the world—that world 
towards which Dasein as an entity always comports itself. 

Whenever we let there be an involvement with something in something 
beforehand, our doing so is grounded in our understanding such things as 
letting something be involved, and such things as the “with-which” and 
the “in-which” of involvements. Anything of this sort, and anything else 


1 “Aus dem Wobei des Bewendenlassens her ist das Womit der Bewandtnis freigegeben.’ 

2 Here we follow the newer editions in reading: ‘Sofern sich ihm überhaupt ein Seiendes 
zeigt...'. The older editions read ‘Sofern sich mit ihm... .', which is somewhat ambiguous 
but suggests that we should write: ‘To the extent that with what is ready-to-hand any 
entity shows itself.. .’. 

3 ‘Worauf’. The older editions have ‘woraufhin’. 

4 ‘Das vorgängige Erschliessen dessen, woraufhin die Freigabe des innerweltlichen 
Begegnenden erfolgt . . .’ 


I.3 Being and Time 119 
that is basic for it, such.as the ‘‘towards-this”’ as that in which there is an 
involvement, or such as the “‘for-the-sake-of-which” to which. every 
‘“‘towards-which”’ ultimately goes back!—all these must be disclosed 
beforehand with a certain intelligibility [Verständlichkeit]. And what is 
that wherein Dasein as Being-in-the-world understands itself pre-onto- 
logically? In understanding a context of relations such as we have 
mentioned, Dasein has assigned itself to an “‘in-order-to” [U :-zu], and it 
has done so in terms of a potentiality-for-Being for the sake of which it 
itself is—one which it may have seized upon either explicitly or tacitly, 
and which may be either authentic or inauthentic. This “‘in-order-to”’ 
prescribes a ‘‘towards-this” as a possible ‘‘in-which”’ for letting something 
be involved; and the structure of letting it be involved implies that this 
is an involvement which something Ags—an involvement which is with 
something. Dasein always assigns itself from a “for-the-sake-of-which” 
to the “with-which” of an involvement; that is to say, to the extent that it 
is, it always lets entities be encountered as ready-to-hand.? That wherein 
[Worin] Dasein understands itself beforehand in the mie of assigning 
itself is that for which [das Woraufhin] it has let entities ve encountered 
beforehand. The ‘‘wherein’’of an act of understanding which assigns or refers itself, 
is that for which one lets entities be encountered in the kmd of Being that belongs 
to involvements ; and this “wherein” is the phenomenon of the world.” And the 
structure of that to which [woraufhin] Dasein assigns itself is what makes 
up the worldhocd of the world. 4 

That wherein Dasein already understands itself in this way is always 
something with which it is primordially familiar. This familiarity with 
the worlu does not necessarily require that the relations which are con- 
stitutive for the world as world should be theoretically transparent. 
However, the possibility of giving these relations an explicit ontologico- 
existential Interpretation, is grounded in this familiarity with the world; 
and this familiarity, in turn, is constitutive for Dasein, and goes to make 
up Dasein’s understanding of Being. This possibility is one which can be 
seized upon explicitly in so far as Dasein has set itself the task of giving 
a primordial Interpretatic.ı for its own Being and for the possibilities of 
that Being, or indeed for the meaning of Being in general, 


1‘... wie das Dazu, als wobei es die Bewandtnis hat, das Worum-willen,.darauf letztlich 
alles Wozu zurückgeht.’ The older editions have ‘. . . als wobei es je die Bewandtnis 
hat...’ and omit the hyphen in ‘Worum-willen’, | 

2 ‘Dieses zeichnet ein Dazu vor, als mögliches Wobei eines Bewendenlassens, das 
strukturmässig mil etwas bewenden lässt. Dasein verweist sich je schon immer aus einem 
Worum-willen her an das Womit einer Bewandtnis, d. h. es lässt je immer schon, sofern 
es ist, Seiendes als Zuhandenes begegnen.’ | 

3 ‘Das Worin des sichverweisenden Verstehens als Woraufhin des Begegnenlassens von Seiandem 
in der Seinsart der Bewandtnis ist das Phänomen der Welt.’ 


87 


120 Being and Time 1.3 


But as yet our analyses have done no more than lay bare the horizon 
within which such things as the world and worldhood are to be sought. 
If we are to consider these further, we must, in the first instance, make it 
still more clear how the context of Dasein’s assigning-itself is to be taken 
ontologically. 

In the act of understanding [Verstehen], which we shall analyse more 
thoroughly later (Compare Section 31), the relations indicated above 
must have been previously disclosed ; the act of understanding holds them 
in this disclosedness. It holds itself in them with familiarity; and in so 
doing, it holds them before itself, for it is in these that its assignment 
operates.! The understanding lets itself make assignments both in these 
relationships themselves and of them.? The relational character which 
these relationships of assigning possess, we take as one of signifying.’ In 
its familiarity with these relationships, Dasein ‘signifies’ to itself: in a prim- 
ordial manner it gives itself both its Being and its potentiality-for-Being 
as something which it is to understand with regard to its Being-in-the- 
world. The ‘“‘for-the-sake-of-which’ signifies an “in-order-to”; this in 
turn, a ““towards-this’”’; the latter, an “in-which”’ of letting something be 
involved; and that in turn, the “with-which” of an involvement. These 
relationships are bound up with one another as a primordial totality; 
they are what they are as this signifving [Be-deuten} in which Dasein 
gives itself beforehand its Being-in-the-werli as something te be under- 
stood. The relational! totality of this signiiying we call “significance”. This 
is what makes up the structure of the world-—the structure of that wherein 
Dasein as such already is. Dasein, in tts familiarity with significance, ts the 
ontical condition for the possibility of discovering entities which are encountered in a 
world with involvement (readiness-to-hana) as their kind of Being, and witch can 


. thus make themselves known as they are in themselves [in seinem An-sich]. Dasein 


as such 1s always something of this sort; along witi: its Being, a context of 
the ready-to-hand is already essentially discoverer!: Dasein, in so far as it 


1 ‘Das... Verstehen ... hält die angezeigten Bezüge in ciner vorgängigen Erschiossen- 
heit. Im vertrauten Sich-darin-haiten halt es sich diese ver als das, worin sich sein Ver- 
weisen bewegt.’ The context suggests that Heidegger’s “dicse’ refers to the relationships 
(Bezüge) rather than to the disclosedness (Erschlossenheit), though the latter interpreta- 
tion seems a bit more plausible grammatically. 


2*Das Verstehen lässt sich in und von diesen Bezügen sclbst verweisen.’ It is not 
entirely clear whether ‘von’ should be translated as ‘of’, ‘from’, or ‘by’. 


3 “be-deuten’. While Heidegger ordinarily writes this word without a hyphen (even, for 
instance, in the next sentence), he here takes pains to hyphenate it so as to suggest that 
etymologically it consists of the intensive prefix ‘be-’ followed by the verb ‘deuten’—to 
‘interpret’, ‘explain’ or ‘point to’ something. We shall continue to follow our convention 
of usually translating ‘bedeuten’ and ‘Bedeutung’ by ‘signify’ and ‘signification’ respec- 
tively, reserving ‘significance’ for ‘Bedeutsamkeit’ (or, in a few cases, for ‘Bedeutung’). 
But these translations obscure the underlying meanings which Heidegger is emphasizing 
in this passage. | 


I.3 Being and Time 121 
is, has always submitted? itself already to a ‘world’ which it encounters, 
and this submission! belongs essentially to its Being. 

But in significance itself, with which Dasein is always familiar, there 
lurks the ontological condition which makes it possible for Dasein, as 
something which understands and interprets, to disclose such things as 
‘significations’; upon these, in turn, is founded the Being of words and of 
language. 

The significance thus disclosed is an existential state of Dasein—of its 
Being-in-the-world; and as such it is the ontical condition for the possibility 
that a totality of involvements can be discovered. 

If we have thus determined that the Being of the ready-to-hand 
(involvement) is definable as a context of assignments or references, and 
that even worldhood may so be defined, then has not the ‘substantial 
Being’ of entities within-the-world been volatilized into a system of 
Relations And inasmuch as Relations are always ‘something thought’, 
has not the Being of entities within-the-world been dissclvec ico ‘pure 
thinking’? 

Within our present field of investigation the followiny si 'notures ard 
dimensions of ontological problematics, as we have repeatecly empha- 
sized, must be kept in principle disunct: 1. the Being cf those entities 
within-ihe-world which we proximally encounter—readi::es.-:3-hand; 
2. the Being of those-entities which we can come across and whese nature 
we car determine if we discover them in their own right by going through 
the entities proximally eacountered—-presence-at-hand; 3. the Being of 
that onticai condition which makes it possible for entities within-the-world 
to be discovered at all—-the worldhood of the world. This third kind of 
Being gives us an existential way of determining the nature of Being-in-the- 
world, that is, of Dasein. The other two concepts of Being are categories, 
and pertain to entities whese Being is uot of the kind which Dasein pos- 
sesscs, The context of assignments or references, which, as significance, is 
constitutive for worldhood, cau be taken formally in the sense of a system 
of Reiations. But one must note that in such formalizations the pheno- 
mena get levelled off so much that their real phenomenal content may be 
lost, especially in the case of such ‘simple’ relationships as those which lurk 
in significance. The phenomenal content of these ‘Relations’ and ‘Relata’ 

I ‘angewiesen’; ‘Angewiesenheit’. The verb ‘anwe'sen’, like ‘verweisen’, can often be 
translated as ‘assign’, particularly in the sense in which one assigns or allots a place to 
something, or in the sense in which one gives an ‘assignment’ to someone by instructing 
him how to proceed. The past participle ‘angewiesen’ can thus mean ‘as:igr.ed’ in either 
of these senses; but it often takes on the connotation of ‘being dependent on’ scmething or 
even ‘at the mercy’ of something. In this passage we have tried to compromise by using 


the verb ‘submit’. Other passages call for other idioms, and no single standard translation 
seems feasible. 


122 Being and Time I. 3 


—the “in-order-to”, the “for-the-sake-of”, and the “with-which” of an 

involvement—is such that they resist any sort of mathematical function- 

alization; nor are they merely something thought, first posited in an ‘act 

of thinking.’ They are rather relationships in which concernful circum- 

spection as such al:eadv dwells, This ‘system of Relations’, as something. 
constitutive for woridhood, is so far ‘from volatilizing the Being of the 

ready-to-hand within-the-worid, that the worldhood of the world pro- 

vides the basis on which such entities can for the first time be discovered 

as they are ‘substantially’ ‘in thernselves’. And only if entities within-the- 

world can.be encountered at all, is it possible, in the field of such entities, . 
to make accessible what is just present-at-hand and no more. By reason of 
their Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more, these latter entities can 

have their ‘properties’ defined mathematically in ‘functional concepts.’ 

Ontologically, such concepts are possible only in relation to entities whose 

Being has the character of pure substantiality. Functional concepts are 

never possible except as formalized substantial concepts. 

In order to bring out the specifically ontological problematic of world- 
hood even more sharply, we shall carry our analysis no further until we 
have clarified our Interpretation of worldhood by a case at the opposite 
extreme. 


B. A Contrast between our Analysis of Worldhood and Descartes’ 
Interpretation of the World 

Only step by step can the concept of worldhood and the structures 
which this phenomenon embraces be firmly secured in the course of our 
investigation. The Interpretation of the world begins, in the first instance, 
with some entity within-the-world, so that the phenomenon of the world 
in general no longer comes into view; we shall accordingly try to clarify 
this approach. ontologically by considering what is perhaps the most 
extreme form in which it has been carried out. We not only shall 
present briefly the basic features of Descartes’ ontology of the ‘world’, but 
shall inquire into its presuppositions and try to characterize these in the 
light of what we have hitherto achieved. The account we shall give of 
these matters will enable us to know upon what basically undiscussed 
ontological ‘foundations’ those Interpretations of the world which have 
come after Descartes—and still more those which preceded him—have 
operated. 

Descartes sees the extensio as basically definitive ontologically for the 
world. In so far as extension is one of the constituents of spatiality (accord- 
ing to Descartes it is even identical with it), while in some sense spatiality 
remains constitutive for the world, a discussion of the Cartesian ontology 


“a 
. ` 


{. 3 Being and Time 123 
of the ‘world’ will provide us likewise with a negative support for a 
positive explication of the spatiality of the environment and of Dasein 
itself. With regard to Descartes’ ontology there are three topics which 
we Shall treat: 1. the definition of the ‘world’ as res extensa (Section 19); 
2. the foundations of this ontological definition (Section 20); 3. a her- 
meneutical discussion of the Cartesian ontology of the ‘world’ (Section 21). 
The considerations which follow will not have been grounded in full detail 
until the ‘cogito sum’ has been phenomenologically destroyed. (See Part 
Two, Division 2.) 


$ 19. The Definition of the ‘World’ as res extensa. 


Descartes distinguishes the ‘ego cogito’ from the ‘res corporea’. This dis- 
tinction will thereaftér be determinative ontologically for the distinction 
between ‘Nature’ and ‘spirit’. No matter with how many variations of 
content the opposition between ‘Nature’ and ‘spirit’ may get set up onti- 
cally, its ontological foundations, and indeed the very poles of this 
opposition, remain unclarified; this unclarity has its proximate [nächste] 
roots in Descartes’ distinction. What kind of understanding of Being does 
he have when he defines the Being of these entities? The term for the 
Being of an entity that is in itself, is substantia”. Sometimes this expres- 
sion means the Being of an entity as substance, substantiality; at other times 
it means the entity itself, a substance. That ‘‘substantia”’ is used in these two 
ways is not accidental; this already holds for the ancient conception of 
ovaia. 

To determine the nature of the res corporea ontologically, we must 
explicate the substance of this entity as a substance—that is, its sub- 
stantiality. What makes up the authentic Being-in-itself [An-ihrn-selbst- 
sein] of the res corporea? How is it at all possible to grasp a substance as 
such, that is, to grasp its substantiality? “Et quidem ex quolibet attributo 
substantia cognoscitur ; sed una tamen est cuiusque substantiae praecipua proprietas, 
quae ipsius naturam essentiamque constituit, et ad quam aliae omnes referuntur,” tii 
Substances become accessible in their ‘attributes’, and every substance has 
some distinctive property from which the essence of the substantiality of that 
definite substance can be read off. Which property is this in the case of 
the res corporea? “Nempe extensio in longum, latum et profundum, subsiantiae 
corporeae naturam constitutt.”!¥ Extension—namely, in length, breadth, and 
thickness—makes up the real Being of that corporeal substance which we 
call the ‘world’. What gives the extensio this distinctive status? “Nam 
omne aliud quod corpori tribui potest, extensionem praesupponit ...’’¥ Extension is 
a state-of-Being constitutive for the entity we are talking about; it is that 


X This portion of Being and Time has never been published. 


gl 


124 Being and Time 1.9 


which must already ‘be’ before any other ways in which Being is deter- 
mined, so that these can ‘be’ what they are. Extension must be ‘assigned’ 
[‘‘zugewiesen’’] primarily to the corporeal ‘Thing. The ‘world’s’ extension 
and substantiality (which itself is characterized by extension) are accord- 
ingly demonstrated by showing how all the other characteristics which 
this substance definitely possesses (especially divisio, figura, motus), can be 
conceived only as modi of extensio, while, on the other hand, extensio sine 
figura vel motu remains quite intelligible. 

Thus a corporeal Thing that maintains its total extension can still 
undergo many changes in the ways in which that extension is distributed 
in the various dimensions, and can present ıtself in manifold shapes as 
one and the same Thing. “. . . atque unum et idem corpus, retinendo suam 
eandem quantitatem, pluribus diversis modis potest extendi: nunc scilicet magis 
secundum longitudinem, minusque secundum latitudinem vel profunditatem, ac paulo 
post e contra magis secundum latitudinem, et minus secundum longitudinem.” Y1 

Shape is a modus of extensiv, and so is motion: for motus is grasped only 
“si de nullo nisi locali cogitemus, ac de vi a qua excitatur . . . non inguiramus.’’Vil 
If the motion is a property of the res corperea, and a property which is, 
then in order for it to be experienceable in its Being, it must be conceived 
in terms of the Being of this entity itself, in terms of extensio; this means 
that it must be conceived as mere change of location. So nothing like 
‘force’ counts for anything in determining what the Being of this entity is. 
Matter may have such definite characteristics as hardness, weight, and 
colour; (durities, pondus, color); but these can all be taken away from it, 
and it still remains what it is. These do not go to make up its real Being; 
and in so far as they are, they turn out to be modes of extensio. Descartes 
tries to show this in detail with regard to ‘hardness’: “Nam, quantum ad 
duritiem, nihil aliud de illa sensus nobis indicat, quam partes durorum corporum 
resistere motui manuum nostrarum, cum in illas incurrant. Si enim, quotiescunque 
manus nostrae versus aliquam partem moventur, corpora omnia ibi existentia recede- 
rent eadem celeritate qua illae accedunt, nullam unguam duritiem sentiremus. Nec 
ullo modo potest intelligi, corpora quae sic recederent, idcirco naturam corporis esse 
amissura; nec proinde ipsa in duritie consistit.” Hardness is experienced 
when one feels one’s way by touch [Tasten]. What does the sense of touch 
‘tell’ us about it? The parts of the hard Thing ‘resist? a movement of the 
hand, such as an attempt to push it away. If, however, hard bodies, those 
which do not give way, should change their locations with the same 
velocity as that of the hand which ‘strikes at’ them, nothing would ever 
get touched [Berühren], and hardness would not be experienced and 
would accordingly never ée. But it is quite incomprehensible. that bodies 
which give way with such velocity should thus forfeit any of their 


I. 3 Being and Time 125 
corporeal Being. If they retain this even under a charge in velocity which 
makes it impossible for anything like ‘hardness’ to be, then hardness does 
not belong to the Being of entities of this sort. ‘“Eademque ratione ostendi 
potest, et pondus, et colorem, et alias omnes eiusmodi qualitates, quae in materia 
corporea sentiunlur, ex ea tolli posse, ipsa integra remanente: unde sequitur, a nulla 
ex illis etus <sc. extensionis naturam dependere.’ ix ‘Thus what makes up the 
Being of the res corporea is the extensio: that which is omnimodo divisibile, 
figurabile et mobile (that which can change itself by being divided, shaped, 
or moved in any way), that which is capax mutationum—that which main- 
tains itself (remanet) through all these changes. In any corporeal Thing 
the real entity is what is suited for thus remaining constant [ständigen Verbleib], 
so much so, indeed that this is how the substantiality of such a substance 
gets characterized, 


{| 20. Foundations of the Ontological Definition of the ‘World? 


Substantiality is the idea of Being to which the ontological characteriza- 
tion of the res extensa harks back. “Per substantiam nihil aliud intelligere 
possumus, quam rem quae ita existit, ut nulla alia re indigeat a! extstendum.” “By 
substance we can understand nothing else than an entity which is in such 
a way that it needs no other entity in order to be.”’* The Being of a ‘sub- 
stance’ is characterized by not needing anything. That whose Being is 
such that it has no need at all for any other entity satisfies the idea of 
substance in the authentic sense; this entity is the ens perfectissimum, 
“, . . substantia quae nulla plane re indigeat, unica tantum potest intelligi, nempe 
Deus.”’*! Here ‘God’ is a purely ontological term, if it is to be understood 
as ens perfectissimum. At the same time, the ‘self-evident’ connotation of 
the concept of God is such as to permit an ontological interpretation for 
the characteristic of not needing anything—a constitutive item in sub- 
stantiality. “Alias vero omnes <res>, non nisi ope concursus Det existere posse 
percipimus.”*™41 All entities other than God need to be “produced” in the 
widest sense and also to be sustained. ‘Being’ is to be understood within 
a horizon which ranges from the production of what is to be present-at- 
hand to something which has no need of being produced. Every entity 
which is not God is an ens creatum. ‘The Being which belongs to one of these 
entities is ‘infinitely’ different from that which belongs to the other; yet 
we still consider creation and creator alike as entities. We are thus using 
“Being” in so wide a sense that its meaning embraces an ‘infinite’ differ- 
ence. So even created entities can be called “‘substance”’ with some right. 
Relative to God, of course, these entities need to be produced and sus- 
tained; but within the realm of created entities—the ‘world’ in the sense 
of ens creatum—there are things which ‘are in need of no other entity’ 


92 


eo 


Tabs Being and Time I.3¢ 


í 


reia.'vely to the creaturciy production and sustentation that we find, for 
instince, in man. Of thes: substances there are two kinds: the res cogitans ` 
aud the ree extensa. À 

The Being of that substance whose distinctive proprietas is presented by 
extensio thus becomes definable in principle ontologically if we -clarify 
che meaning of Being which is ‘common’ to the three kinds of substances, one 
of them infinite, the others both finite. But ““. . . nomen substantiae non con- 
venit Deo et illis univoce ut dict solet in Scholis, hoc est . . . quae Deo et creaturis 
sit communis.” Xiii Here Descartes touches upon a problem with which 
medieval ontology was often busied—the question of how the signification 
of “Being” signifies any entity which one may on occasion be con- 
sidering. In the assertions ‘God is’ and ‘the world is’, we assert Being. 
This word ‘is’, however, cannot be meant to apply to these entities in the 
same sense (ourwrtpws, univoce), when between them there is an infinite 
difference of Being; if the signification of ‘is’ were univocal, then what is 
created would be viewed as if it were uncreated, or the uncreated would 
be reduced to the status of something created. But neither does ‘Being’ 
function as a mere name which is the same in both cases: in both cases 
‘Being’ is understood. This positive sense in which ‘Being’ signifies is one 
which the Schoolmen took as a signification ‘by analogy’, as distinguished 
from one which is univocal or merely homonymous. Taking their depar- 
ture from Aristotle, in whom this problem is foreshadowed in prototypical 
form just as at the very outset of Greek ontology, they established various 
kinds of analogy, so that even the ‘Schools’ have different ways of taking 
the signification-function of “Being”. In working out this problem onto- 
logically, Descartes is always far behind the Schoolmen ;*!v indeed he 
evades the question. “... . nulla eius <substantiae) nominis significatio potest 
distincte intelligi, quae Deo et creaturis sit communis.”*Y This evasion is tanta- 
mount to his failing to discuss the meaning of Being which the idea of 
substantiality embraces, or the character of the ‘universality’ which belongs 
to this signification. Of course even the ontology of the medievals has gone 
no further than that of the ancients in inquiring into what “Being” itself 
may. mean. So it is not surprising if no headway is made with a question 
like that of the way in which “Being” signifies, as long as this has to be 
discussed on the basis of an unclarified meaning of Being which this 
signification ‘expresses’. The meaning rem ins unclarified because it is 
held to be ‘self-evident’. | 

Descartes not only evades the ontological question of substantiality 
altogether; he also cmphasizes explicitly that substance as such—that is 
to say, its substantiality—is in and for itself inaccessible from the outset 
[vorgängig]. “Verumtamen non potest substantia primum arimadverti ex hoc solo, 


1.3 Being and Time 127 
quod sit res existens, quia hoc solum per se nos non afficit. . .”.XY! Being” itself 
does not ‘affect’ us, and therefore cannot be perceived. ‘Being is not a 
Real predicate,’ says Kant, who is merely repeating Descartes’ principle. 
‘Thus the possibility of a pure problematic of Being gets renounced in 
principle, and a way is sought for arriving at those definite characteristics 
of substance which we' have designated above. Because ‘Being’ is not in 
fact accessible as an entity, it is expressed through attributes—definite 
characteristics of the entities under consideration, characteristics which 
themselves are.? Being is not expressed through just any such charac- 
teristics, but rather through those satisfying in the purest manner that 


meaning of “Being” and "substantiality”, which has still been tacitly 


presupposed. To the substantia fmita as res corporea, what must primarily 
be ‘assigned’ [“Zuweisung”] is the extensio, “Quin et facilius intelligimus 
substantiam extensam, vel substantiam cogitantem, quam substantiam solam, 
omisso eo quod coguet vel sit extensa”’ ;xvU for substantiality is detachable 
ratione tanium; it is not detachable realiter, nor can we come across it in 
the way in which we come across those entities themselves which are 
substantially. 

Thus the ontological wou for defining the ‘world’ as res extensa have 
been made plain: they. lie ifthe idea of substagtiality, which not only 
remains unclarified in the meaning of its Being, but gets passed off as 
something incapable of clarification, and gets represented indirectly by 
way of whatever substantial property belongs most pre-eminently to the 
particular substance. Moreover, in this (way of defining a substance 
through some substantial exitity, lies the peagan. whi the term ‘“‘substance” 
is used in two ways. What i is here intended is substantiality; and it gets 
understood in terms of a’ characteristic: .of substance—a characteristic 
which is itself an entity. 8 Because something ontical is made to underlie 
the ontological, the expression “substantia” functions sometimes with a 
signification which is ontological, sometimes with one which is ontical, but 
mostly with one which is hazily ontico-ontological. Behind this slight 
difference of signification, however, there lies hidden a failure to master 
the basic problem of Being. To ‘treat this.adequately, we must ‘track 
down’ the equivocations ‘in the right way. He who attempts this sort of 
thing does not just ‘busy himself’ with ‘merely verbal significations’; he 
must venture forward into the most primordial problematic of the ‘things 
themselves’ to get such ‘nuances’ straightened out. 


en Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, Transcendental Dialectic, Book II, chapter ITI, 
tion 4.- 

2‘, , seiende Bestimmtheiten des betreffenden Seienden .. .’ 

3 o, . . aya einer seienden Beschaffenheit der Substanz.’ 


95 


96 


128 Being and Time I. 3, 
T 2z. Hermeneutical Discussion of the Cartesian Ontology of the ‘World’ 

The critical question. now arises: does this ontology of the ‘world’ seek 
the phenomenon of the world at all, and if not, does it at least define some 
entity within-the-world fully enough so that.the worldly character of this 
entity can be made visible in it? Fo both questions we must answer “No”. The 
entity which Descartes is trying to grasp ontologically and in principle 
with his “‘extensto”’, is rather such as to become discoverable first of all by 
going through an.entity within-the-world which is proximally ready-to- 
hand—Nature. Though this is the case, and though any ontological 
characterization of this latter entity within-the-world may lead. us into 


„obscurity, even if we consider: both the idea: of substantiality and the 


meaning of the “existit” and ‘‘ad extstendum’’ which have been brought 
into the definition of that idea, it still remains possible that through an 
ontology based upon a radical separation of God, the “I”, and the ‘world’, 
the ontological problem of the world will in some sense get formulated 
and further advanced. If, however, this is not possible, we must then 
demonstrate explicitly not only that Descartes’ conception of the world 
is ontologically defective, but that his Interpretation and the foundations 
on which it is based have led him to pass over both the phenomenon of the 
world and the Being of those entities within-the-world which are proxim- 
ally ready-to-hand. 

In our exposition of the problem of worldhood (Section 14), we sug- 
gested the importance of obtaining proper access to this phenomenon. So 
in criticizing the Cartesian point of departure, we must ask which kind 
of Being that belongs to Dasein we should fix upon as giving us an appro- 
priate way of access to those entities with whose Being as extensio Descartes 
equates the Being of the ‘world’. The only genuine access to them lies in 
knowing [Erkennen], intellectio, in the sense of the kind of knowledge 
[Erkenntnis] we get in mathematics and physics. Mathematical knowledge 
is regarded by Descartes as the one manner of apprehending entities 
which can always give assurance that their Being has been securely 
grasped. If anything measures up in its own kind of Being to the Being 
that is accessible in mathematical knowledge, then it zs in the authentic 
sense. Such entities are those which always are what they are. Accordingly, 
that which can be shown to have the character of something that constantly 
remains (as remanens capax mutationum), makes up the real Being of those 
entities of the world which get experienced. That which enduringly 
remains, really is. This is the sort of thing which mathematics knows. 
That which is accessible in an entity through mathematics, makes up its 
Being. Thus the Being of the ‘world’ is, as it were, dictated to it in terms 
of a definite idea of Being which lies veiled in the concept of substantiality, 


I.3 Being and Time 129. 
and in terms of the idea of a knowledge by- which such entities are 
cognized. The kind of Being which belongs to entities within-the-world 
is something which they themselves might have been permitted to present; 
but Descartes does not let them do so.! Instead he prescribes for the world 
its ‘real’ Being, as it were, on the basis of an idea of Being whose source 


has not been unveiled and which has not been demonstrated in its own” 


right—an idea in which Being is equated with constant presence-at-hand. 
Thus his ontology of the world is not primarily determined by his leaning 
towards mathematics, a science which he chances to esteem very 
highly, but rather by his ontological orientation in principle towards 
Being as constant presence-at-hand, which mathematical! knowledge 
is exceptionally well suited to grasp. In this way Descaries explicitly 
switches over philosophically from the development oi traditional 
ontology to modern mathematical physics and it tanscendental 
foundations. 

The people) of how to get appropiate access to cri’ within-the- 
world is one which Descartes feels no need to raise. Unuo ius unbroken 
ascendance of the traditional ontology, Ihe way to get a Scnumne grasp 
of what really is ‘cles cigentlichen Seienden; has been decide mn advance: 


it fies in roci- Scholding’ in the widest sense [der Anschauung” 
weitesten Signe}: deavoety or "thinking" ts just a more wily ces 


form of roeîv and is founded upon it. Seiseze (aledner:), 2s opposed to 
intellectio, still remains possible as a way cf access to entities ov a beholding 
which is percepiual in character; but Descartes presents his ‘critique’ of 
it because he is oriented ontologically by these principles. 

Descartes knows very well that entitics do not proximally show them- 
selves in their rea! Being. What is ‘proximaily’ given is this waxen Thing 
which is coloured, favoured, hard, and cold in definite ways, and which 
gives off its own special sound when struck. But this is no: of any import- 
ance ontologically, nor, in general, is anything which is given through the 
senses, ‘“Satzs erii, st advertamus sensuum perceptiones non referri, nist ad istam 
corporis humani cum mente coniunctionem, et nobis quidem ordinarie exhibere, quid 
ad illam externa corpora prodesse possint aut nocere .. °’ xyi The senses do not 
enable us to cognize any entity in its Being; they merely serve to announce 
the ways in which ‘external’ Things within-the-world are useful or harm- 
ful for human creatures encumbered with bodies. “. .. nom... nos docere, 
qualia < corpora» in seipsis existant” >*!* they tell us nothing about entities 
in their Being. “Quod agentes, percipiemus naturam materiae, sive corporis in 
universum spectatt, non consistere in eo quod sit res dura, vel ponderosa, vel colorata, 

1 ‘Descartes lässt sich nicht die Seinsart des innerweltlichen Seienden von diesem 


vorgeben...’ 
E 


~~ 


we, 


e: 


p. understood in a phenom kai 


“it stays in a definite locatiieyepiiwely to some. othe 
changing itstocation, or that ng 


. aun, 


‚to sensory perception is obiger 
entities encdäintered in such Pete 


130 Being and Time Lg 
recy ne ee cee nee longum, 


latem et profundum. xx a 
If we er Descartes’ Ing m p fi on of the experience of haxdness and 
$ Will be plain how unable he i is to let 


b: „But neither hardness nor ‘vesistance 
eae, as. something experienced in itself 
See such an ‘experience. For Descartes, 
to than not yielding place—that is, not 
RR So if a Thing résists, this means that 


- Hardness gets akeni as: a gorda 


4 40 fateh up’ with it. ‘But when the. exper- 
es this way, the kind of Being whith a gE 
, and so is any possibility that the 
püon should be grasped in their Being. 


which permjts the other Tt 
ience of haräness i is Interp 


“ Descartes takes the kind of. Sui which belongs to the perception of 


something, and translates it into the only kind he knows: the perception 
of something, becomes a defimite way of Being-present-at-hand-side-by- 
side of two vs: extensae which are present-at-hand; the way in which their 


movements are related is itself a mode of that extensio by which the 


presence-at-hand of the corporeal Thing is primarily characterized. Of 
course no behaviour in which one feels one’s way by touch [eines :tastenden 
Verhaltens] can be ‘completed’ unless what can thus be felt [des Betast- 


. baren] has ‘closeness’ of a very special kind. But this does not mean that 


touching [Beriihrung] and the hardness which makes itself known in 
touching consist ontologically in different velocities of two eorporeal 


‘Things. Hgrdness and resistance do not show themselves at all unless an 


entity has the kind of Being which Dasein—or at least something living— 
Thus Descartes’ discussion of possible kinds of access to entities within- 
the-world is dominated by an idea of Being which has been gathered from 
a definite realm of these entities themselves. 
The idea of Being as permanent presence-at-hand not only gives 


Descartes’ a-Hrotive for identifying entities within-the-world with the world 


in general, and for providing so extreme a definition of their Being; it 
also keeps him from bringing Dasein’s ways of behaving into view in a 
manner which is ontologically appropriate. But thus the road is completely 


. das i in der Sinnlichkeit sich Zeigende in seiner eigenen Seinsart sich ie 


III. 3 Being and Time 131 
blocked to seeing the founded character of all sensory and intellective 
awareness, and to understanding these as possibilities of Being-in-the- 
world.? On the ceatrary, he takes the Being of ‘Dasein’ (to whose basic 
constitution Beiv::;-:u-the-world belongs) in the very same way as he takes 
the Being of the res extensa—namely, as substance. 

But with these criticisms, have we not fobbed off on Descartes a task 
altogether beyond his horizon, and then gone on to ‘demonstrate’ that 
he has failed to solve it? If Descartes does not know the phenomenon of 
the world, and thus knows no such thing as within-the-v-.rld-ness, how 
can he identify the world itself with certain entities within-the-world and 
the Being which they possess? 

In controversy over principles, one must not only attach oneself to 
theses which can be grasped doxographically:tone must also derive one’s 
orientation from the objective tendency of the problematic, even if it 
does not go beyond a rather ordinary way of taking things. In his doctrine 
of the res cogitans and the res extensa, Descartes not only wants to formulate 
the problem of ‘the “I” and the world’; he claims to have solved it in a 
radical manner. His Meditations make this plain.*(See especially Medita- 
tions I and VI.) By taking his basic ontological orientation from traditional 
sources and not subjecting it to positive criticism, he has made it impos- 
sible to lay bare any primordial ontological problematic of Dasein; this 
has inevitably obstructed his view of the phenomenon of the world; and. 
has made it possible for the ontology of the ‘world’ to be compressed into- 
that of certain entities within-the-world. The foregoing discussion should 
have proved this. 

‘One might retort, however, that even ifin point of fact both the problem 
of the world and the Being of the entities encountered environmentally 
as closest to us remain concealed, Descartes has still laid the basis for 
characterizing ontologically that entity within-the-wor!ld upon which, in 
its very Being, every other entity is founded—material Nature. This would 
be the fundamental stratum upon which all the other strata of actuality 
within-the-world are built up. The extended Thing as such would serve, 
‘in the first instance, as the ground for those definite characters which 
suvw themselves, to be sure, as qualities, but which ‘at bottom’ are 
quantitative modifications of the modes of the extensio itself. These 
qualities, which are.themselves reducible, would provide the footing for 
such specific qualities as “beautiful”, “ugly”, “in keeping”, “not in 


1 ‘Damit ist aber vollends der Weg dazu verlegt, gar auch noch den fundierten Charakter 
alles sinnlichen und verstandesmässigen Vernehmens zu sehen und sie als eine Möglichkeit 
des In-der-Welt-seins zu verstehen.” While we have construed the pronoun ‘sie’ as re- 
ferring to the two kinds of awareness which have*just been mentioned, it would be 
grammatically more plausible to interpret it as referring either to *Däsein’s ways of 
behaving’ or to ‘the idea of Being as permanent presence-at-hand’. 


99 


L00 


132 Being and Time I.3 


9? ic 


keeping,” “useful”, “useless”. If one is oriented primarily by Thinghood, 
these latter qualities must be taken as non-quantifiable value-predicates 
by which what is in the first instance just a material Thing, gets stamped 
as something good. But with this stratification, we come to those entities 
which we have characterized ontologically as equipment ready-to-hand 
The Cartesian analysis of the ‘world’ would thus enable us for the first 
time to build up securely the structure of what is proximally ready-to- 
hand; all it takes is to round out the Thing of Nature until it becomes a 
full-fledged Thing of use, and this is easily done. 

But quite apart from the specific problem of the world itself, can the 
Being of what we encounter proximally within-the-world be reached 
ontologically by this procedure? When we speak of material Thinghood, 
have we not tacitly posited a kind of Being—the constant presence-at 
hand of Things—which is so far from having been rounded out ontologic- 
ally by subsequently endowing entities with value-predicates, that these 
value-characters themselves are rather just ontical characteristics of those 
entities which have the kind of Being possessed by Things? Adding on 
value-predicates cannot tell us anything at all new about the Being of 
goods, but would merely presuppose again that goods have pure presence-at-hand 
as their kind of Being. Values would then be determinate characteristics 
which a Thing possesses, and they would be present-at-hand. ‘They would 
have their sole ultimate ontological source in our previously laying down 
the actuality of Things as the fundamental stratum. But even pre- 
phenomenological experience shows that in an entity which is supposedly 
a Thing, there is something that will not become fully intelligible through 
Thinghood alone. Thus the Being of Things has to be rounded out. 
What, then does the Being of values or their ‘validity’ [“Geltung’’] (which 
Lone took as a mode of ‘affirmation’) really amount to ontologically? 
Ana what does it signify ontologically for Things to be ‘invested’ with 
valtes in this way? As long as these matters remain obscure, to reconstruct 
the Thing of use in terms of the Thing of Nature is an ontologically 
questionable undertaking, even if one disregards the way in which the 
problematic has been perverted in principle. And if we are to reconstruct 
this Thing of use, which supposedly comes to us in the first instance ‘with 
its skin off’, does not this always require that we previously take a positive look 
at the phenomenon whose totality such a reconstruction is to restore ? But if we have 
not given a proper explanation beforehand of its ownmost state of Being, 
are we not building our reconstruction without a plan? Inasmuch as this 
reconstruction and ‘rounding-out’ of the traditional ontology of the ‘world’ 
results in our reaching the same entities with which we started when we 
analysed the readiness-to-hand of equipment and the totality of 


I. 3 Being and Time 133 
involvements, it seems as if the Being of these entities has in fact been 
clarified or hasat least become a problem. But by taking extensio as a proprietas, 
Descartes can hardly reach the Being of substance; and by taking refuge 
in ‘value’-characteristics [“‘wertlichen’”? Beschaffenheiten] we are just 
as far from even catching a glimpse of Being as readiness-to-hand, let 
alone permitting it to become an ontological theme. 

Descartes has narrowed down the question of the world to that of 
Things of Nature [Naturdinglichkeit] as those entities within-the-world 
which are proximally accessible. He has confirmed the opinion that to 
know an entity in what is supposedly the most rigorous ontical manner is 
our only possible access to the primary Being of the entity which such 
knowledge reveals. But at the same time we must have the insight to 
see that in principle the ‘roundings-out’ of the Thing-ontology also 
operate on the same dogmatic basis as that which Descartes has adopted. 

We have already intimated in Section 14 that passing over the world 
and those entities which we proximally encounter is not accidental, not 
an oversight which it would be simple to correct, but that it is grounded 
in a kind of Being which belongs essentially to Dasein itself. When our 
analytic of Dasein has given some transparency to those main structures 
of Dasein ‘which are of the most importance in the framework of this 
problematic, and when we have assigned [zugewiesen] to the concept of 
Being in general the horizon within which its intelligibility becomes 
possible, so that readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand also become 
primordially intelligible ontologically for the first time, only then can our 
critique of the Cartesian ontology of the world (an ontology which, in 
principle, is still the usual one today) come philosophically into its own. 

To do this, we must show several things. (See Part One, Division 
Three.)? 

1. Why was the phenomenon of the world passed over at the beginning 
of the ontological tradition which has been decisive for us (explicitly 
in the case of Parmenides), and why has this passing-over kept 
constantly recurring? 

2. Why is it that, instead of the phenomenon thus passed over, entities 
within-the-world have intervened as an ontological theme ?*® 

3. Why are these entities found in the first instance in ‘Nature’? 

4. Why has recourse been taken to the phenomenon of vaine when it 
has seemed necessary to round out such an ontology of :he world? 

1 This Division has never been published. 
3 ‘Warum s ANE AE R ene Phänomen das innerweii ch Sciende als 
ontol es Thema ein?’ The y on ‘überspringen’ (‘pass ov cr’) and “einsprin- 


gen’ (‘intervene’ or ‘serve as a deputy’) is lost in translation. On ‘ einspringen’ see our 
note 1, p..158, H. 122 below. 


TOT 


134 Being and Time I. 3 

In the answers to these questions a positive understanding of the problem- 
atic of the world wii be i. cached for the first time, the sources of our failure 
to recognize it wii] be exhibited, and the ground for rejerüng the tradi- 
tional ontology of the world will have been demonstrated. 

The wc ld and Dasein and entities within-the-world are the ontologic- 
ally constitutive states which are closest to us; but we have no guarantee 
that we can achieve the basis for meeting up with these as phenomena by 
the seeming:y obvious procedure of starting with cae Things of the world, 
still less Ly taking our orientation from what is :ısposediy the most 
rigorous knowledge of entitics. Our observations on Descartes should have 
brought us this insight. 

But if we recall that spatiality is manifestly ore ui ‘ie constituents of 
entities within-the-world, then in the end tne Cartesica analysis of the 
‘world’ can still be ‘rescued’. When Descartes wes „o radical as to set up 
the extensio as the Sraesudpositum for every definite eo :: acteristic cf the res 
corporea, he prepared the way for the uncerstaud:t.2 -< something a prion 
whose content Kart was to establish with greater per.etration. Within 
certain limits the analysis of the extensio remains ‘uiependent of his 
neglecting io provide an explicit interpretation for ci. Seing of extended 
entities. There is sorae phenomenal justification for #garding the extensio 
as a basic characteristic cf che ‘world’, even if by reecasse to this neither 
the spatiality of the world nor that of the entitics we encounter in our 
environment a spatiality wiicn is proximally discovered, nor even that 
of Dasein itself, can be conceived ontologically. 


C. The Aroundness af the Environment? and Dasein’s Spatiality 

Ir: connection with our first preiiminary sketch of Being-in (See Section 
12), we had to conirast Dasein with a way of Being in space which we cail 
‘insitleness” [Inwendigzeit]. This expression means that an entity which 
is itself extendec is closed round [umschl »ssen] by the extended boundaries 
of something tha: is likewise extended. The entity inside [Das inwendig 
Seiende] and that v;hich closes it round are both zresent-at-hand in space. 
Yet even if we deny that Dasein has any such insideness in a spatial 
receptacle, this does not in principle exclude it from having any spatiality 
at all, but merely keeps open the way for seeing the kind of spatiality 
which is constitutive for Dasein. This must now be set forth. But inasmuch 
as an” entity within-the-world is likewise in space, its spatiality will have 
an onialogical connection with the world. We must therefore deterrnine 
in what sense space is a constituent for that world which has in turn been 
Sie acl asanitem in the structure of Being-in-the-world. In particular 


1 ‘Das Umbafte der Umwelt’. See our note 1, p. 93, H. 65 above, i 


I. 3 Being and Time 135 
we must show how the aroundness of the environment, the specific 
spatiality of entities encountered in the environment, is founded upor 
the worldhood of the world, while contrariwise the world, on its part, is 
not present-at-hand in space. Our study of Dasein’s spatiality and ihe 
way in which the world is spatially determined will take its departure 
from an analysis of what is ceady-to-hand in space within-the-world. We 
shall consider three topics: 1. the spatiality of the ready-to-hand within- 
the-world (Section 22); 2. the spatiality of Being-in-che-world (Section 
23); 3. space and the spatiality of Dasein (Section 24). 


q 22. The Spatiality of the Ready-to-hand Within-the-world 

If space is constitutive for the world in a sense which we have yet to 
determine, then it cannot surprise us that in our foregoing ontological 
characterization of the Being of what is within-the-world we have had 
to look upon this as something that is also within space. This spatiality of 
the ready-to-hand is something which we have not yet grasped explicitly 
as a phenomenon; nor lave we pointed out how it is bound up with the 
structure of Being which belongs to the ready-to-hand. ‘This is now our 
task. 

To what extent has our characterization of the ready-to-hand already 
come up against its spatiality? We have been talking about what is 
proximally ready-to-hand. This means not only those entities which we 
encounter first before any others, but also those which are “close by’.! 
What is ready-to-hand in our everyday dealings has the character of 
closeness. To be exact, this closeness of cquipment has already been 
intimated in the term ‘readiness-to-hand’, which expresses the Being of 
equipment. Every entity that is ‘to hand’ has a diffe.ent closeness, which 
is not to be ascertained by measuring distances. ‘This closeness regulates 
itself in terms of circumspectively ‘calculative’ manipulating and using. 
At the same time what is close in this way gets established by the circum- 
spection of concern, with regard to the direction in which the equipment 
is accessible at any time. When this closeness of the equipment has been 
given directionality,® this signifies not merely that the equipment has its 


1 “in der Nahe.’ While the noun ‘Nahe’ often means the ‘closeness’ or ‘nearness’ of some- 
thing that is clase to us, it can also stahl for our immediate ‘vicinity’, as in the presen? 
expression, and in many passages it can be interpreted either way. We shall i in ger. ral 
‘close by" it as ‘closeness’, but we shall translate ‘in der Nahe’ and similar phrases as 
‘close by’ 

3 "Die ausgerichtete Nähe des Zeugs . . .’ The verb ‘ausrichten’ has many specialized 


meanings—to ‘align’ a row of troops ‚0‘ lore’ a mine, to ‘make cen Jena al ' for 
something, to ‘carry out’, a ANPE cidegger however, keeps its root rr; g 
in mind and associates it with the ward. ‘Richtung’ (‘direction’ , ‘route to be bss Hes 


etc.). We shall accordingly translate it as a rule by some form of the verb direct i i» : h 
will also be used occasionally for the verb ‘richten’), or by some compound ex; nu 
involying the word ‘directional’. For further discussion, see H. 108 ff. below. 


103 


- y translated it, leaving the English ‘region’ for ‘ 


136 Being and Time I. 3 


position [Stelle] in space as present-at-hand somewhere, but also that as 
equipment it has been essentially fitted up and installed, set up, and put 
to rights. Equipment has its place [Platz], or else it ‘les around’; this must 
be distinguished in principle from just occurring at random in some 
spatial position. When equipment for something or other has its place, 
this place defines itself as the place of this equipment—as one place out 
of a whole totality of places directionally lined up with each other and 
belonging to the context of equipment that 1s environmentally ready-to- 
hand. Such a place and such a muliplicity of places are not to be inter- 
preted as the “where” of some random Being-present-at-hand of Things. 
In each case the place is the definite ‘there’ or ‘yonder’ [“‘Dort” und 
“Da’”] of an item of equipment which helongs somewhere. Its belonging- 
somewhere at the time [Die jeweilige H ngehörigheit] corresponds to the 
equipmental character of what is ready- o-hand; that is, it corresponds to 
the belonging-to [Zugehörigkeit] which the ready-to-hand has towards a 
totality of equipment in accordance with its involvements. But in general 
the “whither” to which the totality of places for a context of equipment 
gets allotted, is the underlying condition which makes possible the belong- 
ing-somewhere ofan equipmental totality as something that can be placed. 
This “whither”, which makes it possible for equipment to belong some- 
where, and which we circumspectively keep in view ahead of us in our 
concernful dealings, we call the “‘regten’’.* 

‘In the region of’ means not only ‘in the direction of’ but also within 
the range [Umkreis] of something that lies in that direction. The kind of 
place which is constituted by direction and remoteness? (and closeness 
is only a mode of the latter) ıs already oriented towards a region and 
oriented within it. Something like a region must first be discovered if 
there is to be any possibility of allotting or coming across places for a 
tetality of equipment that is circumspectively at one’s disposal. The 
regional o: ‘entation of the multiplicity of places belonging to the ready- 
to-hand goes to make up the aroundness—the “‘round-about-us” [das 
Um-uns-herum]—of those entities which we encounter as closest environ- 
mentally. A three-dimensional multiplicity of possible positions which 
gets filled up with Things present-at-hand is never proximally given. This 
dimensionality of space is still veiled in the spatiality of the ready-to-hand. 
The ‘above’ is what is ‘on the ceiling’; the ‘below’ is what is ‘on the floor’; 

1 ‘Gegend’. There is no English word which quite corresponds to ‘Gegend’. ‘Region’ 
and ‘whereabouts’ perhaps come the closest, and we have chosen the former as the more 
convenient. (Heidegger himself frequently uses the word ‘Region’, but he does so in 
contexts where ‘realm’ scems to be the most Te translation; we have usually so 
9 ‘Entferntheit’. For further discussion, see Section 23 and our note 2, p. 138, H. 105. 


I. 3 Being and Time 137 
the ‘behind’ is what is ‘at the door’; all “wheres”? are discovered and 
circumspectively interpreted as we go our ways in everyday dealings; 
they are not ascertained and catalogued by the observational measure- 
ment of space. 

Regions are not first formed by things which are. present-at-hand 
together; they always are ready-to-hand already in individual places. 
Places themselves cither get allotted to the ready-to-hand in the circum- 
spection of concern, or we come across them. Thus anything constantly 
ready-to-hand of which circumspective Being-in-the-world takes account 
beforehand, has its place. The ‘‘where’’ of its readiness-to-hand is put to 
account as a matter for concern, and oriented towards the rest of what is 
ready-to-hand. Thus the sun, whose light and warmth are in everyday 
use, has its own places—sunrise, midday, sunset, midnight; these are 
discovered in circumspection and treated distinctively in terms of changes 
in the usability of what the sun bestows. Here we have something which 
is ready-to-hand with uniform constancy, although it keeps changing; its 
places become accentuated ‘indicators’ of the regions which lie in them. 
These celestial regions, which need not have any geographical meaning as 
yet, provide the “whither” beforehand for every! special way of giving 
form to the regions which places can occupy. The house has its sunny side 
and its shady side; the way it is divided up into ‘rooms’ [“‘Raume’’] is 
oriented towards these, and so is the ‘arrangement’ [“Einrichtung”] 
within them, according to their character as equipment. Churches and 
graves, for instance, are laid out according to the rising and the setting 
of the sun—the regions of life and death, which are determinative for 
Dasein itself with regard to its ownmost possibilities of Being in the world. 
Dasein, in its very Being, has this Being as an issue; and its concern dis- 
covers beforehand those regions in which some involvement is decisive. 
This discovery of regions beforehand is co-determined [mitbestimmt] by 
the totality of involvements for which the ready-to-hand, as something 
` encountered, is freed. 

The readiness-to-hand which belongs to any such region beforehand 
has the character of inconspicuous familiarity, and it has it in an even more 
primordial sense than does the Being of the ready-to-hand.? The region 
itself becomes visible in a.conspicuous manner only when one. discovers 

1 Reading ‘jede’ with the later editions. The earliest editions have ‘je’, which has been 
corrected in the list of errata. | 

2 ‘Die yorgängige Zuhandenheit der jeweiligen Gegend hat in einem noch ursprüng- 
licheren Sinne als das Sein des Zuhandenen den Charakter der unauffälligen Vertrautheit.’ 
Here the phrase ‘als das Sein des Zuhandenen’ is ambiguously placed. In the light of 
Section 16 above, we have interpreted ‘als’ as ‘than’ rather than ‘as’, and have treated ‘das 


Sein’ as a nominative rather t an accusative. But other readings are grammatically 
just as possible. 


104 


105 


138 Being and Time 1.3 


the ready-tc-hand circumspectively and does so in the deficient modes of 
concern.! Often the region of a place does not become accessible explicitly 
as such a region until one fails to find something in its place. The space 
which is discovered in circumspective Being-in-the-world as the spatiality 
of the totality of.equipment, always belongs to entities themselves as the 
place of that totality. The bare space itself is still veiled over. Space has 
been split up into places. But this spatiality has its own unity through 
that tétality-of-involvements in-accordance-with-the-world [weltmässige] 
which belongs to the spatially ready-to-hand. The ‘environment’ does 
not arrange itself in a space which has been given in advance; but its 
specific worldhood, in its significance, Articulates the context of involve- 
ments which belongs to some current totality of circumspectively allotted 
places. The world at such a time always reveals the spatiality of the space 
which belongs to it. To encounter the ready-to-hand in its environmental 
space remains ontically possible only because Dasein itself is ‘spatial’ with 
regard to its Being-in-the-world. 


T 23. The Spatiality of Beingetn-the-world 

If we attribute spatiality to Dasein, then this “Being in space’ must 
manifestly be conceived in terms of the kind of Being which that entity 
possesses. Dasein is essentially not a Being-present-at-hand; and its 
“spattality” cannot signify anything like occurrence at a position in 
‘world-space’, nor can it signify Being-ready-to-hand at some place. Both 
of these are kinds of Being which belong to entities encountered within- 
the-world. Dastin, however, is ‘in’ the world in the sense that it deals 
with entities encountered within-the-world, and does so concernfully and 
with familiarity. So if spatiality belongs to it in any way, that is possible 
only because of this Being-in. But its spatiality shows the characters of 
deeseverance and directionality.* TE 
. %'Sje wird selbst nur àichtbar in der Weise des Auffallens bei eidem: umsichtigen 


Entdecken des Zuhan und zwar in den defizienten Modi des Besorgens.’ This 


sentence toq is ambiguous. The pronoun ‘Sie’ may refer either to the region, as we have 


_ suggested, or to its readiness- . Furth e, while we have taken ‘nur sichtbar in 
." der Weise des Auffallens’ as a unit, h is possible that: ‘in der Weise des Auffallens’ 


should be construed as going with the words that follow, In this case we should read: 
1, . . becomes visible only when it betomes conspicuquz in our circumspective discovery 
of the ready-to-hand, and indeed in the deficient modes of concern.’ 

3 ‘Ent-fernung und Ausrichtung.’ The nouns ‘Entfernung’ and ‘Entfernheit’ can usually be 
translated by ‘removing’, ‘semoval’, ‘remoteness’, or even ‘distance’. In this j 
however, Heidegger is calling attention tọ the fact that these words are derived oa e 
stem “fern-' (‘far’ or ‘distant’) and the privative prefix ‘ent-’. Usually this prefix would be 
construed as merely intensifying the notion of separation or distance expressed in the 
‘fern-'; but Heidegger chooses to gonstrue it as more strictly privative, so that the verb 
‘entfernen’ will be taken to mean abolishing a distance or farness rather than enhancing it. 
It is as if by the very act of recognizing the ‘remoteness’ of something, we have in a sense 
brought it closer and made it less ‘remote’. 


Apparently there is no word in English with an etymological structure quite parallel, 


» 


x 


I. 3 Being and Time 139 

When we speak of deseverance as a kind of Being which Dasein has with 
regard to its Being-in-the-world, we do not understand by it any such 
thing as remoteness (or closeness) or even a distance.! We use the expre:- 
sion ‘‘deseverance’’* in a signification which is both active and transitive. 
It stands for a constitutive state of Dasein’s Being—a state with regard 
to which removing something in the sense of putting it away is only a 
determinate factical mode. ‘‘De-severing’’* amounts to making the farness 
vanish—that is, making the.remoteness of something disappear, bringing 
it close. Dasein is essentially de-severant: it lets any entity be encountered 
close by as the entity which it is. De-severance discovers remoteness; and 
remoteness, like distance, is a determinate categorial characteristic of 
entities whose nature is not that of Dasein. De-severance*, however, is 
an existentiale; this must be kept in mind. Only to the extent that entities 
are revealed for Dasein in their deseveredness [Entferntheit], do ‘remote- 
nesses’ [“‘Entfernungen”] and distances with regard to other things 
become accessible in eniities within-the-worid themselves. Two points are 
just as little desevered from one another as two Things, for neither of these 
types of entity has the kind of Being which would make it capable of 
desevering. They merely have a measurable distance between them, 
which we can come across in our de-severing. | 

Proximally and for the most part, de-severing® is a circumspective 


to that of ‘entf:rnen’; perhaps ‘dissever’ comes the nearest, for this too is a verb of separa- 
tion in which a privative prefix is used as an intensive. We have coined the similar verb 
‘desever’ in the hare that this will suggest Heidegger’s meaning when ‘remove’ and its 
derivatives seem inappropriate. But with ‘desever’, one cannot slip back and forth from 
one sense to another as easily as one can with ‘entfernen’; so we have resorted to the 
expedient of using both ‘desever’ and remove’ and their derivatives, depending upon the 
sense we feel is intended. Thus ‘entfernen’ will generally be rendered by ‘remove’ or 
‘desever’, ‘entfernt’ by ‘remote’ or Uesevered’. Since Heidegger is careful to distinguish 
‘Entfernung’ and ‘Entferntheit’, We shall usually translate these by ‘deseverance’ and 
‘remoteness’ respectively; in thé;few ‚cases where these translations do not:seem appro- 
priate, we shall subjoin the German word in brackets, © ` ` E a ane 
Our problem is further complicated by Heidegger’s practise of occasionally putting a 
nyphen after the prefix ‘ent-’, presumably to emphasize its privative character. In such 
cases we shall write ‘de-sever’, ‘de-severance’, etc. Unfortunately, however, there are 
typographical discrepancies between the earlier and later editions. Some of the earlier 
hyphens occur at the ends of lines and have been either intentionally or inadvertently 
omitted in resetting the type; some appear at the end of the line in the later editions, but 
not in the earlier ones; others have this position in both editions. We shall indicate each 
of these ambiguous cases with an asterisk, supplying a hyphen only if there seems to be a 
good reason for doing so. 
-; On ‘Ausrichtung’ see our note 2, p. 133, H. 102 above. 
. 1‘Abstand’, Heidegger uses three words which might be translated as ‘distance’: 
Berne’ (our ‘farness’), ‘Entfernung’ (our ‘deseverance’), and ‘Abstand’ (‘distance’ in the 
serie of a measurable interval). We shall reserve ‘distance’ for ‘Abstand’. 


3 ‘Entfernen* besagt ein Verschwindenmachen der Ferne, d. h. der Entferntheit von 
etwas, Naherung.’ 


. 3 This hyphen is found only in the later editions, 


106 


140 Being and Time I.3 
bringing-close—bringing something close by, in the sense of procuring it, 
putting it in readiness, having it to hand. But certain ways in which 
entities are discovered in a purely cognitive manner also have the character 
of bringing them close. Jn Dasein there lies an essential tendency towards 
closeness. All the ways in which we speed things up, as we are more or less 
compelled to do today, push us on towards the conquest of remoteness. 
With the ‘radio’, for example, Dasein has so expanded its everyday 
environment that it has accomplished a de-severance of the ‘world’— 
a de-severance which, in its meaning for Dasein, cannot yet be 
visualized. . 

De-severing does not necessarily imply any explicit estimation of the 
farness of something ready-to-hand in relation to Dasein. Above all, 
remoteness* never gets taken as a distance. If farness is to be estimated, 
this is done relatively to deseverances in which everyday Dasein maintains 
itself. Though these estimates may be i imprecise and variable if we try 
to compute them, in the everydayness of Dasein they have their own 
ER which is thoroughly intelligible. We say that to go over yonder 

“a good walk”, “a stone’s thtow”, or ‘as long as it takes to smoke a 
pipe’. These measures express nöt only that they are not intended to 
‘measure’ anything but also that the remoteness* here estimated belongs 
to some entity to which one goes with concernful circumspection. But 
even when we avail ourselves of a fixed measure and say ‘it is half an hour 
to the house’, this measure must be taken as an estimate. ‘Half an hour’ 
is not thirty minutes, but a duration’ ‘{Dauer] which has no ‘length’ at 
all in the sense of a quantitative stretch, ‘Such a duration is always inter- 
preted in terms of well-accustomed everyday ways in which we ‘make 
provision’ [‘‘Besorgungen’”’]. Remotenesies* are estimated proximally by 
circumspection, even when one is quite familiar with ‘officially’ calcu- 
lated measures. Since what is de-severed. in such estimates is ready-to- 
hand, it retains its character as specifically within-the-world. This even 
implies that the pathways we ‘take towards desevered entities in the 
course of our dealings will vary im their length from day to day. What 
is ready-to-hand in the enviromment is certainly not present-at-hand 
for an eternal observer exempt from : Dasein: but it is encountered 
in Dasein’s circumspectively cencernful everydayness. As Dasein 


goes along its ways, it does not measure off a stretch of space 


as a corporeal Thing which is present-at-hand ; it does not ‘devour 
the kilometres’; bringing-close or de-severance is always a kind of con- 
cernful Being towards what is brought close and de-severed. A pathway 
which is long ‘Objectiyely’ can be much shorter than one which is 
‘Objectively’ shorter still but which is perhaps ‘hard going’ and comes 


I.3 Being and Time 141 
before us! as interminably long. Yet only in thus ‘coming before us’! ts the 
current world authentically ready-to-hand. The Objective distances of Things 
present-at-hand do not coincide with the remoteness and closeness of 
what is ready-to-hand within-the-world. Though we may know these 
distances exactly, this knowledge still remains blind; it does not have the 
function of discovering the environment circumspectively and bringing it 
close; this knowledge ıs used only ın and for a concernful Being which 
does not measure stretches—a Being towards the world that ‘matters’ to 
one [. . . Sein zu der einen “angehenden” Welt]. 

When one is oriented beforehand towards ‘Nature’ and ‘Objectively’ 
measured distances of Things, onc is inclined to pass off such estimates 
and interpretations of deseverance as ‘subjective’. Yet this ‘subjectivity’ 
perhaps uncovers the ‘Reality’ of the world at its most Real; it has nothing 
to do with ‘subjective’ arbitrariness or subjectivistic ‘ways of taking’ an 
entity which ‘in itself’ is otherwise. The circumspective de-severing of Dasein’s 
everydayness reveals the Being-in-itself of the ‘true world’—-of that entity which 
Dasein, as something existing, is already alongside.* 

When one is primarily and even exclusively oriented towards remote- 
nesses as measured distances, the primordial spatiality of Being-in is 
concealed. That which is presumably ‘closest’ is by no means that which 
is at the smallest distance ‘from us’. It lies in that which is desevered to an 
average extent when we reach for it, grasp it, or look at it. Because Dasein 
is essentially spatial in the way of de-severance, its dealings always keep 
within an ‘environment’ which is desevered from it with a certain leeway 
[Spielraum]; accordingly our seeing and hearing always go proximally 
beyond what is distantially ‘closest’. Sceing and hearing are distance- 
senses [Fernsinne] not because they are far-reaching, but because it is in 
them that Dasein as deseverant mainly dwells. When, for instance, a man 
wears a pair of spectacles which are so close to him distantially that they 
are ‘sitting on his nose’, they are environmentally more remote from him 
than the picture on the opposite wall. Such equipment has so little 
closeness that often it is proximally quite impossible to find. Equipment 
for seeing—and likewise for hearing, such as the telephone receiver—has 
what we have designated as the inconspicuousness of the proximally ready- 
to-hand. So too, for instance, does the street, as equipment for walking. 
One feels the touch of it at every step as one walks; it is seemingly the 
closest and Realest of all that is ready-to-hand, and it slides itself, as it 


1 ‘vorkommt’; ‘ “Vorkommen’”’. In general ‘vorkommen’ may be translated as 
‘occur’, and is to be thought of as applicable strictly to the present-at-hand. In this 
passage, however, it is applied to the ready-to-hand; and a translation which calls 
attention to its etymological structure seems to be called for. 

2 ‘Das umsichtige Ent-fernen der Alltäglichkeit des Daseins entdeckt das An-sich-sein der “‘wahren 
Welt”, des Seienden, bei dem Dasein als existierendes je schon ist.’ 


I0 


142 Being and Time ee L8 


were, along certain portions of one’s body—the soles of one’s feet. And 
yet it is farther remote than the acquaintance whom one encounters ‘on 
the street’ at a ‘remoteness’ [‘‘Entfernung’’] of twenty paces when one is 
taking such a walk. Circumspective concern decides as to the closeness 
and farness of what is proximally ready-to-hand environmentally. What- 
ever this concern dwells alongside beforehand is what is closest, and this 
is what regulates our de-severances. 

If Dasein, in its concern, brings something close by, this does not signify 
that it fixes something at a spatial position with a minimal distance from 
some point of the body. When something is close by, this means that it is 
within the range of what is proximally ready-to-hand for circumspection. 
Bringing-close is not oriented towards the I-Thing encumbered with a 
body, but towards concernful Beiag-in-the-world—that is, towards what- 
ever is proximally encountered in such Being. It follows, moreover, that 
Dasein’s spatiality is not to be defined by citing the position at which 
some corporeal Thing is present-at-hand. Of course we say that even 
Dasein always occupies a place. But this ‘occupying’ must be distinguished 
in principle from Being-ready-to-hand at a place in some particular 
region. Occupying a place must be conceived as a desevering of the 
environmentally ready-to-hand into a region which has been circumspec- 
tively discovered in advance. Dasein understands its “here” [Hier] in 
terms of its environmental “yonder”. The “here” does not mean the 
“where” of something present-at-hand, but rather the “whereat’’ [Wobei] 
of a de-severant Being-alongside, together with this de-severance. Dasein, 
in accordance with its spatiality, is proximally never here but yonder; 
from this “yonder” it comes back to its “here”; and it comes back to its 

108 “here” only in the way in which it interprets its concernful Being- 
towards in terms of what is ready-to-hand yonder. This becomes quite 
plain if we consider a certain phenomenal peculiarity of the de-severance 
structure of Being-in. 

As Being-in-the-world, . Dasein maintains itself essentially in a de- 
severing. This de-severance—the farness of the ready-to-hand from Dasein 
itself—is something that Dascin can never cross over. Of course the remote- 
ness of something ready-to-hand from Dasein can show up as a distance 
from it,! if this remoteness is determined by a relation to some Thing‘ 
which gets thought of as present-at-hand at the place Dasein has formeriy 
occupied. 1... żin can subsequently traverse the “‘between”’ of this distance, 
but only in such a way that the distance itself becomes one which has been 
desevered*. So little has Dasein crossed over its de-severance that 
it has rather taken it along with # and keeps doing so constantly; for 


1° ,. kann zwar selbst von diegem.als Abstand vorfindlich werden...” - 


I.3 Being and Time 143 

Dasein is essentially de-severance—that is,:it is spatial. It cannot wander abous 

within the current range of its deisemerances; it can never do more than 

change them. Dasein is spatial in thet dicdiscovers space circumspectively, 

so that indeed. it constantly compests: Shelf de-severantly* towards the 
entities thus spatially encountered. ay 

As de-severant Being-in, Dasein dung. likewise the character of direction- 
ality. Every bringing-close [Nahersagi}tias already taken in advance a 
direction towards a region out What is de-severed brings itself close 
‚[sich nähert], so that one can come eceaasit with regard toits place. Circum- 
spective concern is di-::vering = ü directionality. In this concern 
—that is, in the Being-in-the-wealll FBasein itself—a supply of ‘signs’ is 
presented. Signs, as equipment, ufint the giving of directions in a way 
which is explicit and easily mampan: ‘They keep explicitly open those 
regions which have been used ciroutmiypectively—the particular “whithers” 
to which something belongs or goes, or gets brought or fetched. If Dasein 
is, it already has, as directing and deszwering, its own discovered region. 
Both directionality and de-sevesasi#e; zu modes of Being-in-the-world, 
are guided beforehand by the circembspantion of concern. 

Out of this directionality arise tke ‘fixed directions of right and left. 
Dasein constantly takes these directions along with it, just as it does its 
de-severances. Dasein’s spatializetion im its ‘bodily nature’ is likewise 
marked out in accordance with ileese “directions. (This ‘bodily nature’ 
hides a whole problematic of its own, "though we shall not treat it here.) 
Thus things which are ready-to-hangl'and used for the body—like gloves, 
for example, which are to move wätlig£fhe hands—must be given direction- 
ality towards right and left. A craftsuian’s tools, however, which are held 
in the hand and are moved with-it, «do: not share the hand’s specifically 

manual’ [“handliche”] movements, ‚86 although hammers are handled 
just as much with the hand as gloves | ‘are, there are no right- or left- 
handed hammers. . 

One must notice, however, that tthe directionality which belongs to 
de-severance is founded upon Being-in-the-world. Left and right are not 
something ‘subjective for which the subject has a feeling; they are direc- 
tions of one’s directedness into a world that is ready-to-hand already. ‘By 
the mere feeling of a difference Between my two sides’=*! I could never 
find my way about in a world. Thessuhject with a ‘mere feeling’ of this 
difference is a construct posited. in ‘disregard of the state that is truly 
constitutive for any subject—namely, that whenever Dasein has such a 
‘mere feeling’, it is iri a world already.and must be in it to bê able to orient 
itself at all. This becomes plain from the example with whiclz Kant tries 
to clarify the phenomenon of orientation. 


109 


110 


144 Being and Time I.8 

Suppose I step into a room which is familiar to me but dark, and which 
has been rearranged [umgeräumt] during my absence so that, everything 
which used to be at my right is now at my left. If I am to orient myself 
the ‘mere feeling of the difference’ between my. two sides will be of no 


help at all as long as I fail to apprehend some definite object ‘whose 


position’, as Kant remarks casually, ‘I have in mind’. But what does this 
signify except that whenever this happens I necessarily orient myself both 
in and from my being already alongside a world which is ‘familiar’ ?! The 
equipment-context of a world must have been presented to Dasein. That 
I am already in a world is no less constitutive for the possibility of orienta- 
tion than is the feeling for right and left. While this state of Dasein’s 
Being is an obvious one, we are not thereby justified in suppressing the 
ontologically constitutive role which it plays. Even Kant does not suppress 
it, any more than any other Interpretation of Dasein. Yet the fact that 
this is a state of which we constantly make use, does not exempt us from 
providing a suitable ontological explication, but rather demands one. 
The psychological Interpretation according to which the “I” has some- 
thing ‘in the memory’ [im Gedächtnis’”] is at bottom a way of alluding to 
the cxistentially constitutive state of Being-in-the-world. Since Kant fails to 
see this structure, he also fails to recognize all the interconnections which 
the Constitution of any possible orientation implies. Directedness with 
regard to right and left is based upon tive essential directionality of Dasein 
in general, and this directionality in turn is essentially co-determined by 
Being-in-the-world. Even Kant, of coure, has not taken orientation as a 
theme for Interpretation. He mercly wants to show that every orientation 
requires a ‘subjective principle’. Here ‘subjective’ is meant to signify 
that this principle is a priori.® Nevertheless, the a priori character of directed- 
ness with regard to right and left is based upon the ‘subjective’ a prior: of 
Being-in-the-world, which has nothing to do with any determinate 
character restricted beforehand to a worldless subject. 

De-severance and directionality, as constitutive characteristics of Being- 
in, are determinative for Dasein’s spatiality—for its being concernfully 
and circumspectively in space, in a space discovered and within-the-world. 
Only the explication we have just given for the spatiality of the ready-to- 
hand within-the-world and the spatiality of Being-in-the-world, will 
provide the prerequisites for working out the phenomenon of the world’s 
spatiality and formulating the ontological problem of space. 


14, . in und aus einem je schon sein bei einer “bekannten” Welt.’ The earlier editions 
have ‘Sein’ for © sein’, 

2 Here we follow the later editions in reading ‘... bedeuten wollen: a priori.’ The 
earlier editions omit the colon, making the passage ambiguous. 


I. 3 Being and Time 145 
i 24. Space and Dasein’s Spatiality 


As Being-in-the-world, Dasein has already discovered a ‘world’ at any 
time. This discovery, which is founded upon the worldhood af the world, 
is one which we have charactcrized as freeing entities for a totality of 
involvements. Freeing something and letting. it be involved, is accom- 
plished by way of referring or assigning oneself circumspectively, and this 
in turn is based upon one’s previously understanding significance. We 
have now shown that circumspective Being-in-the-world is spatial. And 
only because Dasein is spatial in the way of de-severance and directionat‘tv 
can what is ready-to-hand within-the-world be. encountered in its spat- 
iality. To free a totality of involvements is, equiprimordially, to let some- 
thing be involved at a region, and to do so by de-severing and giving 
directionality; this amounts to freeing the spatial belonging-somewhere of 
the ready-to-hand. In that significance with which Dasein (as. concernful 
Being-in) is familiar, lies the essential co-disclosedness of space.! 

The space which is thus disclosed with the worldhood of the world still 
lacks the pure multiplicity of the three dimensions. In this disclosedness 
which is closest to us, space, as the pure “wherein” in which positions are 
ordered by measurement and the situations of things are determined, still. 
remains hidden. In the phenomenon of the region we have alrcady indi- 
cated that on the basis of which space is discovered beforehand in Dasein, 
By a ‘region’’ we have understood the “whither” to which an equipment- 
context ready-to-hand might possibly belong, when that context is of 
such a sort that it can be encountered as directionally desevered—that 
is, as having been placed.” This bclongingness [Gehörigkeit] is determined 
in termis of the significance which is constitutive for the world, and it 


Articulates the “hither” and “thither” within the possible “whither”. In‘ 


general the “‘whither” gets prescribed by a referential totality which has 
been made fast in a “for-the-sake-of-which’” of concern, and within which 
letting something be involved by freeing it, assigns itself. With anything 
encountered as ready-to-hand there is always an involvement in [bei] a 
region. To the totality of involvements which makes up the Being of the 
ready-to-hand within-the-world, there belongs a spatial involvement 
which has the character of a region. By reason of such an involvement, 


the rcady-to-hand becomes something which we can come across and 


ascertain as having form and dircction.* With the factical Being of 


1 <, | . die wesenhafte Miterschlossenheit des Raumes.’ 
2‘Wir verstehen sie als das Wohin der möglichen a en a des zuhandenen 
Zeugzusammenhanges, der als ausgerichtet entfernter, d. h. platzierter soll begegnen 
können.’ 


3 ‘Auf deren Grunde wird das Zuhandene nach Form und Richtung vorfindlich und 
bestimmbar’. The earliest editions have ‘erfindlich’, which has been corrected to 'vor- 
findlich’ in a hist of errata. 


146 | Being and Time Lg, 


.. Dasein, what is ready-to-hand within-the-world is desevered® and given 


112 


-- directionality, depending upon the degree of transparency that is possible 


for concernful circumspection. 

When we let entities within-the-warld be encountered in the way which 
is constitutive for Being-in-the-world, we ‘give them space’. This ‘giving 
space’, which we also call ‘making room’ for them,’ consists in freeing - 
the ready-to-hand for its’spatiality: Asa way of discovering and presenting 
a possible: totality of spaces determined by involvements, this making- 
room is what makes possible one’s factical orientation at the’ time. In 
concerning itself circumspectively with ‘the world, Dasein can move 
things around or out of the way or ‘make room’ for them [um—, weg—, 
ünd "einfkuinen’”]- oniy because making-room—understood as an éxist- 
entiale—bélogigs to its Being-in-the-world. But neither the region pre- 
viously discovered nor in general the current spatiality is explidftly in 

view. In itsélfit is present [zugegen] for circumspection in the i inconspicu- 
ousness of ‘those ready-to-hand things in which that circumspection is 
concernfully absorbed: With Being-in-the-world, space is proximally 
discovered in this spatiality. On the basis of the spatiality thus discovered, 
space itself becomes accessible for cognition. 

Space is not in the subject, nor is the world-in space. Space is rather ‘ in’ the 
world in so far as space has been disclosed by that Being-in-the-world 


_wilich is constitutive for Dasein. Space is not to be found in the subject, 
“tron-does the subject observe the world ‘as if’ that world were in a space; 
‚but the ‘subject’ (Dasein), if well understood ontologically, i is spatial. And 


because Dasein is spatial in the way we have described, space sHows itself 
as a priori. This term does not mean anything like previously belcnging 
to a subject which is proximally still worldless and which emits a space 
out of itself. Here “apriority” means the previousness with which space 
has been encountered (as a region) whenever the ready-to-hand is en- 
countered environmentally. 

The spatiality of what we proximally encoubter in circumspection_can 
become a theme for circumspection itself, as well as a task for calculation 
and measurement, as in building and surveying. Such (hematization of 


‚the spatiality of the environment is still predominantly an act of circum- 
‘spection by which space in itself already comes into view in a certain way. 


The Space | which thus shows itself can be studied purely by looking at it, 
if one gives up-what was formerly .the only possibility of access to it— 


” circumspective calculation. When space is ‘intuited formally’, the pure 


1 Both ‘Raum-geben’ (our ‘giving space’) and ‘Einraumen’ (our ‘making room’) are 
often used in the metaphorical sense of ‘ytelding’, ‘granting’, or ‘making, concessions’. 
‘Einraumen’ may also be used for ‘arranging’ furniture, ‘moving it in’, or ‘stowing it 
away’. 


1.3 Being and Time 147 
possibilities of spatial relations are discovered. Here one may ge through 
a series of stages in laying bare pure homogeneous space, passing from the 
pure morphology of spatial shapes to analysts situs and finally to the 
purely metrical science of space. In our present study we shall not consider 
how all these are interconnected.**!1 Our problematic is merely designed 
to establish ontologically the phenomenal basis upon which one can 
take the discovery of pure space as a theme for investigation, and work 
it out. 

When space is discovered non-circumspectively by just looking at it, 
the environmental regions get neutralized to pure dimensions. Places— 
and indeed the whole circumspectively oriented totality of places belong- 
ing to equipment ready-to-hand—get reduced to a multiplicity of posi- 
tions for random Things. The spatiality of what is ready-to-hand within- 
the-world loses its involvement-character, and so does the ready-to-hand. 
The world loses its specific aroundness; the environment becomes the 
world of Nature. The ‘world’, as a totality of equipment ready-to-hand, 
becomes spatialized [verraumlicht] to a context of extended Things which 
are just present-at-hand and no more. The homogeneous space of Nature 
shows itself only when the entities we encounter are discovered in such 
a way that the worldly character of the ready-to-hand gets specifically 
deprived of its worldhood.! 

In accordance with its Being-in-the-world, Dasein always has space 
presented as already discovered, though not thematically. On the other 
hand, space in itself, so far as it embraces the mere possibilities of the pure 
spatial Being of something, remains proximally still concealed. The fact that 
spacc essentially shows itself in a world is not yet decisive for the kind of Being 
which it possesses. It need not have the kind of Being characteristic of some- 
thing which is itself spatially ready-to-hand or present-at-hand. Nor does 
the Being of space have the kind of Being whicl: Lelong- to Dasein. Though 
the Being of space itself cannot be conceived as the kind of Being which 
belongs to a res extensa, it does not follow that it must be defined onto- 
logically as a ‘phenomenon’ of such a res. (In its Being, it would not be 
distinguished from such a res.) Nor does it follow that the Being cf space 
can be equated to that of the res cogitans and Conceived as merely ‘subjec- 
tive’, quite apart from the questionable character of the Being of such a 
subject. | 

The Interpretation of the Being of spacc has hitherto been a matter of 
perplexity, not so much because. we have been insufficiently acquainted 
with the content of space itself as a thing [des Sachgehaltes des Raumes 


1°... die den Charakter einer spezifischen Entweltlichung der Weltmassigkeit des 
Zuhandenen hat.’ 


119 


148 Being and Time I. 3 


selbst], as because the possibilities of Being in general have not been in 
principle transparent, and an Interpretation of them in terms of onto- 
logical concepts has been lacking. If we are to understand the ontological 
problem of space, it is of decisive importance that the question of Being 
must be liberated from the narrowness of those concepts of Being which 
merely chance to be available and which are for the most part rather 
rough; and the problematic of the Being of space (with regard to that 
phenomenon itself and various phenomenal spatialities) must be turned 
in such a direction as to clarify the possibilities of Being in general. 

In the phenomenon of space the primary ontological character of the 
Being of entities within-the-world is not to be found, either as unique or 
as one among others. Still less does space constitute the phenomenon of 
the world. Unless we go back to the world, space cannot be conceived. 
Space becomes accessible only if the environment is deprived of its world- 
hood; and spatiality is not discoverable at all except on the basis of the 
world. Indeed space is still one of the things that is constitutive for the 
world, just as Dasein’s own spatiality is essential to its basic state of Being- 
in-the-world.! 


1‘... so zwar, dass der Raum die Welt doch mitkonstituiert, entsprechend der wesen- 
on Räumlichkeit des Daseins selbst hinsichtlich seiner Grundverfassung des In-der- 
elt-seins.’ 


IV 


BEING-IN-THE-WORLD AS BEING-WITH AND 
BEING-ONE’S-SELF. THE “THEY” 


Our analysis of the worldhood of the world has constantly been bringing 
the whole phenomenon of Being-in-the-world into view, although its 
constitutive items have not all stood out with the same phenomenal! dis- 
tinctuess as the phenomenon of the world itself. We have Interpreted the 
world ontologically by going through what is ready-to-hand within-the- 
world; and this Interpretation has been put first, because Dasein, in its 
everydayness (with regard to which Dasein remains a constant theme for 
study), not only is in a world but comports itself towards that world with 
one predominant kind of Being. Proximally and for the .aost part Dasein 
is fascinated with its world. Dasein is thus absorbed in the world; the kind 
of Being which it thus possesses, and in general the Being-in which under- 
lies it, are essential in determining the character of a phenomenon which 
we are now about to study. We shall approach this phenomenon by asking 
who it is that Dasein is in its everydayness. All the structures of Being which 
belong to Dasein, together with the phenomenon which provides the 
answer to this question of the ‘“‘who”, are ways of its Being. To characterize 
these ontologically is to do so existentially. We must therefore pose the 
question correctly and outline the procedure for bringing into view a 
broader phenomenal domain of Dasein’s everydayness. By directing our 
researches towards the phenomenon which is to provide us with an answer 
to the question of the “‘who”’, we shall be led to certain structures of Dasein 
which are equiprimordial with Being-in-the-world: Being-with and Dasein- 
with [Mitsein und Mitdasein]. In this kind of Being is grounded the mode 
of everyday Being-one’s-Self [Selbstsein] ; the explication of this mode will 

1 ‘Das Man’. In German one may write ‘man glaubt’ where in French one would 
write ‘on croit’, or in lish ‘they believe’, ‘one believes’, or ‘it is believed’, But the 
German ‘man’ and the French ‘on’ are specialized for such constructions in a way in 
which the pronouns ‘they’, ‘one’, and ‘it’ are not. There is accordingly no single idiomatic 
translation for the German ‘man’ which will not sometimes lend itself to ambiguity, and 
in general we have chosen whichever construction seems the most appropriate in its 


context. But when Heidegger introduces this word with a definite article and writes ‘das 
Man’, as he does very often in this chapter, we shall translate this expreasion-as ‘the 


> 


“they” ’, trusting that the reader will not take this too literally. 


115 


` 


150 Being and Time 1.4 


enable us to see what we may cali the ‘subject’ of everydayness—the “they”. 
Our chapter on the ‘who’ of the average Dasein will thus be divided up 
as follows: 1. an approach to the existential question of the ‘‘who” of 
Dasein (Section 25) ;2. the Dascin-with of Others, and everyday Being-with 
(Section 26); 3. everyday Being-one’s-Self and the “they” (Section 27). 


T 25. An Approach to the Existential Question of the “Who” of Dasein 
The answer to the question of who Dasein is, is one that was seemingly 
given in Section 9, where we indicated formally the basic characteristics 


of Dasein. Dasein is an entity which is in each case I mysel; its Being is 
in each case mine. This definition indicates an ontologically constitutive state, 
but it does no more t aa Adate Ar the same er this tells us onttcally 
(though in a rough and ready fashion) that in each case an “I”—not 
Others—is this entity. The question of the “who” answers itself in terms 
of the “I” itself, the ‘subject’, the ‘Self’.! The “who” is what maintains 
itself as something identical throughout changes in its Experiences and 
ways of behaviour, and which relates itself to this changing multiplicity 
in so doing. Ontologically we understand it as something which is in 
each case already constantly present-at-hand, both in and for a closed 
realm, and which lies at the basis, in a very special sense, as the subjectum. 
As something selfsame in manifold otherness, it has the character of the 
Self. Even if one rejects the “soul substance” and the Thinghood of con- 
sciousness, or denies that a person is an object, ontologically one is still 
positing something whose Being retains the meaning of present-at-hand, 
whether it does so explicitly or not. Substantiality is the ontological clue 
for determining which entity is to provide the answer to the question of 
the “who”, Dasein is tacitly conceived in advance as something present- 
at-hand. This meaning of Being is always implicated in any case where 
the Being of Dasein has been left indefinite. Yet presence-at-hand is the 
kind of Being which belongs toentities whose character is not that of Dasein. 

The assertion that it is I who in each case Dasein is, is ontically obvious; 
but this must not mislead us into supposing that the route for an onto- 
logical Interpretation of what is ‘given’ in this way has thus been unmis- 
takably prescribed. Indeed it remains questionable whether even the mere 
ontical content of the above assertion does proper justice to the stock of 
phenomena belonging to everyday Dasein. It could be that the “who” of 


‘everyday Dasein just is not the “I myself”. 


1 ‘dem “E „Ibst"’ ’. While we shall ordinarily translate the intensive ‘selbst’ by the corre- 
sponding English intensives ‘itself’, ‘oneself’, ‘myself’, etc., according to the context, we 
shall translate the substantive ‘Selbst’ by the substantive ‘Self’ with a capital. 

$*, .. als Selbiges in der vielfältigen Andersheit . . > While the words ‘identisch’ and 
‘selbig’ are virtually synonyms in ordinary German, Heidegger seems to be intimating a 
distinction between them. We shall accordingly translate the former by ‘identical’ and the 
latter by ‘selfsame’ to show its etymological connection with ‘selbst’. Cf. H. 190 below. 


I. 4 Being and Time 151 

If, in arriving at ontico-ontological assertions, one is to exhibit the 
phenomena in terms of the kind of Being which the entities themselves 
possesses, and if this way of exhibiting them ıs to retain its priority over 
even the most usual and obvivus of answers and over whatever ways of 
formulating problems may have been derived from those answers, then 
the phenomenological Interpretation of Dasein must be defended against 
a perversion of our problematic when we come to the question we are 
about to formulate. 

But is it not contrary to the rules of all sound method to approach a 
problematic without sticking to what is given as evident in the area of 
our theme? And what is more indubitable than the givenness of the “I”? 
And does not this givenness tell us that if we aim to work this out prim- 
ordially, we must disregard everything else that is ‘given’—not only a 
‘world’ that is [einer seienden ““Welt”], but even the Being of other ‘I’s? 
The kind of “giving” we have here is the mere, formal, reflective 
a: creness of the “I”; and perhaps what it gives is indeed evident.! This 
it sht even affords access to a phenomenological problematic in its own 
right, which has in principle the signification of providing a framework 
as a ‘formal phenomenology of consciousness’. 

In this context of an existential analytic of factical Daséin, the question 
arises whether giving the “I” in the way we have mentioned discloses 


Dasein in its everydayness, if it discloses Dasein at all. Is it then obvious. 


a priort that access to Dasein must be gained only by mere reflective 
awareness of the “I” of actions? What if this kind of ‘giving-itself’ on 
the part of Dasein should lead our existential analytic astray and do so, 
indeed, in a manner grounded in the Being of Dasein itself? Perhaps when 
‘Dasein addresses itself in the way which is closest to itself, it always says 
“I am this entity”, and in the long run says this loudest when it is ‘not’ 
this entity. Dasein is in each case mine, and this is its constitution; but 
what if this should be the very reason why, proximally and for the most 
part, Dasein is not itself? What if the aforementioned approach, starting 
with the givenness of the “I” to Dasein itself, and with a rather patent self- 
interpretation of Dasein, should lead the existential analytic, as it were, 
into a pitfall? If that which is accessible by mere “giving” can be deter- 
mined, there is presumably an ontological horizon for determining it; 
but what if this horizon should remain in principle undetermined ? It may 
well be that it is always ontically correct to say of this entity that ‘I’ am it. 
Yet the ortological analytic which makes use of such assertions must make 
certain reservations about them in principle. The word ‘I’ is to be 


1 ‘Vielleicht ist in der Tat das, was diese Art von Gebung, das schlichte, formale, 
teficktive Ichvernehmen gibt, evident.’ 


116 


117 


152 Being and Time - I. 4 
understood only in the sense of a non-committal formal indicator, indicating 
something which may perhaps reveal itself as its ‘opposite’ in some parti- 
cular phenomenal context of Being. In that case, the ‘not-I’ is by no means 
tantamount to an entity which essentially lacks ‘I-hood’ [‘‘Ichheit’’], 
but is rather a definite kind of Being which the ‘P itself possesses, such as 
having lost itself [Selbstverlorenheit]. 

Yet even the positive Interpretation of Dasein which we have so far 
given, already forbids us to start with the formal givenness of the “T”, if our 
purpose is to answer the question of the “who” in a way which is pheno- 
menally adequate. In clarifying Being-in-the-world we have shown that 
a bare subject without a’world never ‘is’ proximally, nor is it ever given. 
And so in the end an isolated “I” without Others is just as far from being 
proximally given.! If, however, ‘the Others’ already are there with us [mit 
da sind] in Being-in-the-world, and if this is ascertained phenomenally, even 
this should not mislead us into supposing that the ontological structure of 
what is thus ‘given’ is obvious, requiring no investigation. Our task is to 
make visible phenomenally the species to which this Dasein-with in closest 
everydayness belongs, and to Interpret it in a way which is ontologically 
appropriate. 

Just as the ontical obviousness of the Being-in-itself of entities within- 
the-world misleads us into the conviction that the meaning of this Being 
is obvious ontologically, arid makes us overlook the phenomenon of the 
world, the ontical obviousness of the fact that Dasein is in each case mine, 
also hides the possibility that the ontological problematic which belongs 
to it has been led astray. Proximally the “who” of Dasein is not only a 
problem ontologically; even ontically it remains concealed. 

But does this mean that there are no clues whatever for answering the 
question of the “who” by way of existential analysis? Certainly not. Of 
the ways in which we formally indicatcd the constitution of Dascin’s Being 
in Sections 9 and 12 above, the one we have been discussing does not, of 
course, function so well as such a cluc as does the one according to which 
Dasein’s ‘Essence’ is grounded in its existence.) If the ‘I’ is an Essential 
characteristic of Dasein, then it is one which must be Interpreted existentially. In 
that case the “Who?” is to be answered only by exhibiting phenomenally 
a definite kind of Being which Dasein possesses. If in each case Dasein is 
its Self only in existing, then the constancy of the Self no less than the 


1 ‘as suchi a clue’: here we read ‘als solcher”, following the later editions. The earliest 
editions have ‘als solche’, which has been corrected in the list of errata. 

“Essence”: while we ordinarily use ‘essence’ and ‘essential’ to translate ‘Wesen’ and 
‘wesenhaft’, we shall use ‘Essence’ and ‘Essential’ (with initial capitals) to translate the 
presumably synonymous but far less frequent ‘Essenz’ and “essentiell”. 

The two ‘formal indications’ to which Heidegger refers are to be found on H. 42 above. 


4 Being and Time 153 


possibility of its “failure to stand by itself”! requires that we formulate the 
question existentially and ontologically as the sole appropriate way of 
access to its problematic. f 


But if the Self is conceived ‘only’ as a way of Being of this entity, this 


seems tantamount to volatilizing the real ‘core’ of Dasein. Any apprehen- ' 


siveness however which one may have about this gets its nourishment from 
the perverse assumption that the entity in question has at bottom the kind 
of Being which belongs to something present-at-hand, even if one is far 
from attributing to it the solidity af an occurrent corporeal Thing. Yet 


man’s ‘substance’ is not spirit as a synthesis of soul and body; it is rather 
existence. 


126. The Dasetn-with of Others and Everyday Being-with 


The answer to the question of the “who” of everyday Dasein is to be 
obtained by analysing that kind of Being in which Dasein maintains 
itself proximally and for the most part. Our investigation takes its orienta- 
tion from Being-in-the-world—that basic state of Dasein by which every 
mode of its Being gets co-cetermined. If we are correct in saying that by 
the foregoing explication of the world, the remaining structural items of 
Being-in-the-world have become visible, then this must also have prepared 
us, in a way, fer answering the question of the ‘‘who”. 

In our ‘description’ of that environment which is closest to us—the 
work-wortd of the craftsman, for example,—the outcome was that along 
with the equipment to be found when one is at work [in Arbeit], those 
Others for whom the ‘work’ {“Werk”] is destined are ‘encountered too’.® 
If this is ready-to-hand, then there lies in the kind of Being which) 
belongs toit (thatis,in its involvcment) an essential assignment or reference 
to possible wearers, for instance, for whom it should be ‘cut to the figure’. 
Similarly, when material is put to use, we encounter its producer or] 
‘supplier’ as one who ‘serves’ well or badly. When, for example, we walk} 
along the edge cf a field but ‘outside it’, the field shows itself as belongin 
to such-and-such a person, and decently kept up by him; the book we 
have used was bught at So-and-so’s shop and given by such-and-such 


1°... die Stancigi« k des Sclbst ebensoschr wie seine mögliche “Unselbstandigkeit” ...’ 
The adjective ‘stand:¢’, which we have usually translated as ‘constant’ in the sense of 
‘permanent’ or ‘costinuirg’, goes back to the root meaning of ‘standing’, as do the 
adjectives ‘selbständig’ (‘independent’) and ‘unselbstiindig’ (‘dependent’). These con- 
cepts will be discussed more fully in Section 64 below, especially H. 422, where ‘Un- 
selbstandigkeit’ wil! te rewritten not as ‘Un-selbstandkeit’ (‘failure to stand by one’s Self’) 
but as ‘Unselbst-stanuigkeit’ (“constancy to the Unself’). See also H. 128. (The connection 
with the concep! of existence will perhaps be clearer if one recalls that the Latin verb 
‘existere’ may also be derived from a verb of standing, as Heidegger points out in his later 
writings.) 

2 Of. Section 15 above, especially H. 70f. 


=. 9 


154 Being and Time I.4 
a person, and so forth. The boat anchored at the shore is assigned in its 
Being-in-itself to an acquaintance who undertakes voyages with it; but 
even if it is a ‘boat which is strange to us’, it still is indicative of Others. 
The Others who are thus ‘encountered’ in a read§-to-hanu, environ- 


. mental context of equipment, a1- mo. somehow added on ir. thought to 


some Thing which is proximally ;ı:.: present-at-hand; such “i.:ıngs’ are 
encountered from out of the we~!.: in which they are reacy-to-hand for 
Others—a world which is alway: nıine too in advance. In cur previous 
analysis, the range of what is encountered within-the-world was, in the 
first instance, narrowed down to equipment ready-to-hand or Nature 
present-at-hand, and thus to enuties with a character other than that of 
Dasein. This restriction was necessary not only for the purpose of simpli- 
fying our explication but above all because the kind of Being which belongs 


to the Dasein of Others, as we encounter it within-the-worid, differs from 
‘readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand. Thus Dasein’s world frees 


entities which not only are quite distinct from equipment and Things, but 
which also—in accordance with their kind of Being as Dasein inernselves— 
are ‘in’ the world in which they are at the same time encountered within- 
the-world, and are ‘in’ it by way of Being-in-the-world,! These entities 
are neither present-at-hand nor ready-to-hand; on the contrary; they are 
like the very Dasein which frees them, in that they are there too, and there 
with it. So if one should want to identify the world in general with 
entities within-the-world, one would have to say that Dasein too is 
‘world’,® 

Thus in characterizing the encountering of Others, one is again still 
oriented by that Dasein which is in each case one’s own. But even in this 
characterization does one not start by marking out and isolating the ‘I’ 
so that one must then seek some way of getting over to the Others from 
this isolated subject? To avoid this misunderstanding we must notice in 


what sense we are talking about ‘the Others’. By ‘Others’ we do not mean 
everyone else but me—those over against m the stands out. They 


spectively concernful. Being-in-the-world. ‘With’ and ‘too’ are to be 


1°, . . sondern gemäss seiner Seinsart als Dasein selbst in der Weise des In-der-Welt- 
seins “in” der Welt ist, in der es zugleich innerweltlich begegnet.’ 

2 ‘Dieses Seiende ist weder vorhanden noch zuhanden, sondern ist so, wie das freige- 
bende Dasein selbst—es ist auch und mit da. Wollte man denn schon Welt überhaupt mit 
ne innerweltlich Seienden identifizieren, dann müsste man sagen, “Welt” ist auch 

ascen, i 


I. 4 Being and Time 155 
understood existentially, not categorially. By reason of this with-like [mithaften] 
Being-in-the-world, the ‚world. is always the one that I share with Others. 
The world of Dasein is a_with-world [Mitwelt). Being-in is Being-with 
Others. Ther Being-in-themselves within-the-world is Dasein-with [Alıt- 
dasein]. 

When Others are encountered, it is not the case that one’s own subject 
is proximally present-at-hand and that the rest of the subjects, which are 
likewise occurrents, get discriminated beforehand and then apprehended; 
nor are they encountered by a primary act of looking at oneself in such 
a way that the opposite pole of a distinction first gets ascertained. They 
are encountered from out of the world, in which concernfully circumspec- 
tive Dasein essentially dwells. Theoretically concocted ‘explanations’ of 
the Being-present-at-hand of Others urge themselves upon us all too 
easily; but over against such explanations we must hold fast to the pheno- 
menal facts of the case which we have pointed out, namely, that Others 
are encountered environmentally. This elemental worldly kind of encounter- 
ing, which belongs to Dasein and is closest to it, goes so far that even one’s 
own Dasein becomes something that it can itself proximally ‘come across’ 
only when it looks away from ‘Experiences’ and the ‘centre of its actions’, 
or does not as yet ‘see’ them at all. Dasein finds ‘itself? proximally in 
what it does, uses, expects, avoids—in those things environmentally ready- 
to-hand with which it is proximally concerned. 

And even when Dasein explicitly addresses itself as “I here”, this 
locative personal des:znation must be understood in terms of Dasein’s 
existential spatiality. In Interpreting this (See Section 23) we have 
already intimated that this “I-here’” does not mean a certain privileged 
point—that of an I-Thing—but is to be understood as Being-in in terms 
of the “yonder” of the world that is ready-to-hand—the ende which 
is the dwelling-place of Dascin as concern.} 

W. von Humboldt!! has alluded to certain languages which express the 
‘TP by ‘here’, the ‘thou’ by ‘there’, the ‘he’ by ‘yonder’, thus rendering the 
personal pronouns by locative adverhs, to put it grammatically. It is con- 
troversial whether indeed the primordial signification of locative expres- 
sions is adverbial or pronominal. But this disputé loses its basis if one 
"notes that locative adverbs have a relationship to the “I” gua Dasein. The 
‘here’ and the ‘there’ and thé ‘yonder’ are primarily not mere ways of 
designating the location of entities present-at-hand within-the-world at 
positions in space; they are rather characteristics of Dasein’s primordial 


1‘, . . dass dieses Ich-hier nicht cinen ausgezeichneten Punkt des Ichdinges meint, 
sondern sich versteht als In-sein aus dem Dort der zuhandenen Welt,ebei dem Dasein 
als Besorgen sich aufhält.’ The older editions have ‘In-Sejn’ for ‘In-sein’, and ‘dabei’ for 
‘bei dem’. 


119 
J 


156 Being and Time I.4 
spatiality. These supposedly locative adverbs are Dasein-designations; 
they have a signification which is primarily existential, not categorial. 
But they are not pronouns either; their signification is prior to the differ- 
entiation of locative adverbs and personal pronouns: these expressions 
have a Dasein-signification which is authentically spatial, and which 
serves as evidence that when we interpret Dasein without any theoretical 
distortions we can see it immediately as ‘Being-alongside’ the world with 
which it concerns itself, and as Being-alongside it spatially—that is to say, 
as desevering* and giving directionality. In the ‘here’, the Dasein which is 
absorbed in its world speaks not towards itself but away from itself towards 
the ‘yonder’ of something circumspectively ready-to-hand; yet it still has 
itself in view in its existential spatiality. 

Dasein understands itself proximally and for the most part in terms of 

‘its world; and the Dasein-with of Others is often encountered in terms of 
what is ready-to-hand within-the-world. But even if Others become 
themes for study, as it were, in their own Dasein, they are not encountered 
as person-Things present-at-hand: we meet them ‘at work’, that is, pri- 
marily in their Being-in-the-world. Even if we see the Other ‘just standing 
around’, he is never apprehended as a human-Thing present-at-hand, but 
his ‘standing-around’ is an existential mode of Being—an unconcerned, 
uncircumspective tarrying alongside everything and nothing [Verweilen 
bei Allem und Keinem]. The Other is encountered in his Dasein-with 
in the world. 

The expression ‘Dasein’, however, shows plainly that ‘in the first 
instance’ this entity is unrelated to Others, and that of course it can still 
be ‘with’ Others afterwards. Yet one must not fail to notice that we 
use the term “Dasein-with” to designate that Being for which the 
Others who are [die seienden Anderen] are freed within-the-world. This 
Dasein-with of the Others is disclosed within-the-world for a Dasein, and 
so too for those who are Daseins with us [die Mitdaseienden], only because 
Dasein in itself is essentially Being-with. The phenomenological assertion 
that “Dasein is essentially Being-with” has an existential-ontological 
meaning. It does not seek to establish ontically that factically I am not 
present-at-hand zlone, and that Others of my kind occur. If this were 

` what is meant by the proposition that Dasein’s Being-in-the-world is 

essentially constituted by Being-with, then Being-with would not be an 
existential attribute which Dasein, of its own accord, has coming to it 
from its own kind of Being. It would rather be something which turns up 
in every case by reason of the occurrence of Others. Being-with is an 
existential characteristic of Dasein even when factically no Other is 
present-at-hand or perceived. Even Dasein’s Being-alone is Being-with 


1.4 Being and Time 157 
in the world. The Other can be missing only in! and for! a Being-with. 
Being-alone is a deficient mode of Being-with; its very possibility is the 
proof of this. On the other hand, factical Being-alone is not obviated by 
the occurrence of a second example ofa human being ‘beside’ me, or by ten 


such examples. Even if these and more are present-at-hand, Dasein can 


still be alone. So Being-with and the facticity of Being with one another 
are not based on the occurrence together of several ‘subjects’. Yet Being- 
alone ‘among’ many does not mean that with regard to their Being they 
are merely present-at-hand there alongside us. Even in our Being ‘among 
them’ they are there with us; their Dasein-with is encountered in a mode 
in which they are indifferent and alien. Being missing and ‘Being away’ 
[Das Fehlen und “Fortsein’’] are modes of Dasein-with, and are possible 
only because Dasein as Being-with lets the Dasein of Others be en- 
countered in its world. Being-with is in every case a characteristic of one’s 
own Dasein; Dasein-with characterizes the Dasein of Others to the extent 
that it is freed by its world for a Being-with. Only so far as one’s own 
Dasein has the essential structure of Being-with, is it Dasein-with as 
encounterable for Others.’ N 

If Dasein-with remains existentially constitutive for Being-in-the- 
world, then, like our circumspective dealings with the ready-to-hand 
within-the-world (which, by way of anticipation, we have called ‘can- 
cern’), it must be Interpreted in terms of the phenomenon of care; for as 


“care” the Being of Dasein in general is to be defined.* (Compare Chapter . 
6 of this Division.) Concern is a character-of-Being which Being-with . 
cannot have as its own, even though Being-with, like concern, is a Being : 


towards entities encountered within-the-world. But those entities towards 
which Dasein as Being-with comports itself do not have the kind of Being 
which belongs to equipment ready-to-hand; they are themselves Dasein. 
These entities are not objects of concern, but rather of solicitude.* : 


1 Italics supplied in the later editions. 

hee Mitdasein charakterisiert das Dasein anderer, sofern es fir ein Mitsein durch 
dessen Welt freigegeben ist. Das eigene Dasein ist, sofern es die Wesensstruktur des 
Mitseins hat, als für Andere begegnend Mitdasein.’ BR p 

8‘... als welche das Sein des Daseins überhaupt bestimmt wird.’ The older’ editions 
omit ‘wird’. i 

t ‘Dieses Seiende wird nicht besorgt, sondern steht in der Fürsorge.’ There is no good 
English equivalent for ‘Fürsorge’, which we shall usually translate by ‘solicitude’. The more 
literal ‘caring-for’ has the connotation of ‘being fond of’, which we do not want here; 
‘personal care’ suggests personal hygiene; De concern’ suggests one’s personal 
business or affairs. ‘Fürsorge’ is rather the kind of care which we find in ‘prenatal! care’ or 
‘taking care of the children’, or even the kind of care which is administered by welfare 

encies. Indeed the word ‘Fürsorge’ is regularly used in contexts where we would speak 
of ‘welfare work’ or ‘social welfare; this is the usage which Heidegger. has in mind in his, 
discussion of ‘Fürsorge’ as ‘a factical social arrangement’. (The etymological connection 
between ‘Sorge (‘care’), ‘Firsorge’ (‘solicitude’}, and ‘Besorgen (‘concern’), is entirely 
lost in our translation.) 


121 


158 Being and Time | 

Even ‘concern’ with food and clothing, and the nursing of the sick body, 
are forms of solicitude. But we understand the expression “solicitude” in 
a way which corresponds to our use of “concern” as a term for an exist- 
entiale. For example, ‘welfare work’ [‘‘Firsorge’’], as a factical social 
arrangement, is grounded in Dasein’s state of Being as Being-with. Its 
factical urgency gets its motivation in that Dasein maintains itself p:oxi- 
mally and for the most part in the deficient modes of solicitude. Being for, 
against, or without one another, passing one another by, not “‘mattering”’ 
to one another—these are possible ways of solicitude. And it is precisely 
these last-named deficient and Indifferent modes that characterize 
everyday, average Being-with-one-another. These modes of Being show 
again the characteristics of inconspicuousness and obviousness which 
belong just as much to the everyday Dasein-with of Others within-the- 
world as to the readiness-to-hand of the equipment with which one is 
daily concerned. These Indifferent modes of Being-with-one-another may 
easily mislead ontological Interpretation inte interpreting this kind of 
Being, in the first instance, as the mere Being-present-at-hand of several 
subjects. It seems as if only negligible variations of the same kind of Being 
lie before us; yet ontologically there is an essential distinction between 
the ‘indifferent’ way in which Things at random occur together and the 
way in which entities who are with one another do not “matter” to one 
another. 

With regard to its positive modes, -solicitude has two extreme pos- 
sibilities. It can, as it were, take away ‘care’ from the Other and put itself 
in his position in concern: it can leap in for him.! This kind of solicitude 
takes over for the Other that with which he is to concern himself. The 
Other is thus thrown out of his own position; he steps back so that after- 
wards, when the matter has been attended to, he can either take it over as 
something finished and at his disposal,? or disburden himself of it com- 
pletely. In such solicitude the Other can become one who is dominated 
and dependent, even if this domination is a tacit one and remains hidden 
from him. This kind of solicitude, which leaps in and takes away ‘care’, is 
to a large extent determinative for Being with one another, and pertains 
for the most part to our concern with the ready-to-hand. 

in contrast to this, there is also the possibility of a kind of solicitude 
which does not so much leap in for the Other as leag ahead of him [ihm 


I... „sich an seine Stelle.setzen, für ihn einspringen.’ Here, as on H. 100 (See our note 2, 
p. 123), it would be more tdiomatic to translate ‘fiir ihn einspringen’ as ‘intervene 
tor him’, ‘stand in for him’ or ‘serve as deputy for him’; but since ‘cinspringen’ is to be 
contrasted with ‘vorspringen', ‘vorausspringen’ and perhaps even ‘entspringen’ in the 
following paragraphs, we have chosen a translation which suggests the etymological 
Ccounection, 


2‘... um nachträglich das Besorgte als fertig Verfügbares zu übernehmen .. .’ 


I. 4 Being and Time 159 


vorausspringt] in his existentiell potentiality-for-Being, not in order to take 
away his ‘care’ but rather to give it back to him authentically as such for 
the first time. This kind of solicitude pertains essentially to authentic care 
— that is, to the existence of the Other, not to a “what? with which he is 
concerned; it helps the Other to become transparent to himself in his care 
and to become /ree for it. 

Solicitude proves to be a state of Dasein’s Being—one which, i 
accordance with its different possibilities, is bound up with its Being 
towards the world of its concern, and likewise with its authentic Being 
towards itself. Being with one another is based proximally and often 
exclusively upon what is a matter of common concern in such Being. 
A Being-with-one-another which arises [entspringt] from one’s doing the 
same thing as someone else, not only keeps for the most part within the 
outer limits, but enters the mode of distance and reserve. The Being- 
with-one-another of those who are hired for the same affair often thrives 
only on mistrust. On the other hand, when they devote themselves to the 
same affair in common, their doing so is determined by the manner in 
which their Dasein, each in its own way, has been taken hold of.! They 
thus become authentically bound together, and this makes possible the right 
kind of objectivity [die rechte Sachlichkeit], which frees the Other in his 
freedom for himself. 

Everyday Being-with-ohe-another maintains itself between the two 
extremes of positive solicitude—that which leaps in and dominates, and 
that which leaps forth and liberates [vorspringend-befreienden]. It brings 
numerous mixed forms to maturity;? to describe these and classify them 
would take us beyond the limits of this investigation. 

Just as circumspection belongs to concern as a way of discovering what is 
ready-to-hand, solicitude is guided by considerateness and forbearance.* 
Like solicitude, these can range through their respective deficient and 
Indifferent modes up to the point of inconsiderateness or the perfunctoriness 
for which indifference leads the way.* 


1 ‘Umgekehrt ist das gemeinsame Sicheinsetzen fiir dieselbe Sache aus dem je eigens 
ergriffenen Dasein bestimmt.’ 

* Reading‘... und zeitigt mannigfache Mischformen . . . with the older editions. The 
later editions have ‘ zeigt’ (‘shows’) instead of ‘zeitigt’ (‘ brings to maturity’). On ‘zeitigen’ 
see H. 304 and our note ad loc. 

3 ‘Wie dem Besorgen als Weise des Entdeckens des Zuhandenen die Umsicht zugehört, 
so ist die Fürsorg: g-leitet durch die Rücksicht und Nachsicht.’ Heidegger is here calling 
attention to the etymological kinship of the three words which he italicizes, each of which 
stands for a special kind of sight or seeing (‘Sicht’). 

The italicization of ‘Umsicht’ (‘circumspection’) is introduced in the newer editions. 

4°... bis zur Rücksichtslosigkeit und dem Nachsehen, das die Gleichgültigkeit 
leitet.” This passage is ambiguous both syntactically and semantically. It is not clear, for 
instance, whether the subject of the relative clause is ‘die Gleichgültigkeit’ or the pronoun 
‘das’, though we prefer the former interpretation. ‘Nachsehen’, which is etymologically 


123 


160 Being and Time I. 4 


The world not only frees the ready-to-hand as entities encountered 
within-the-world; it also frees Dasein, and the Others in their Dasein- 
with. But Dasein’s ownmost meaning of Being is such that this entity 
(which has been freed environmentally) is Being-in in the same world in 
which, as encounterable for Others, it is there with them. We have 
interpreted worldhood as that referential totality which constitutes 
significance (Section 18). In Being-familiar with this significance and 
previously understanding it, Dasein lets what, is ready-to-hand be en- 
countered as discovered in its involvement. In Dasein’s Being, the context of 
references or assignments which significance implies is tied up with Dasein’s 
ownmost Being—a Being which essentially can have no involvement, 
but which is rather that Being for the sake of which Dasein itself is as 
it is. 

According to the analysis which we have now completed, Being with 
Others belongs to the Being of Dasein, which is an issue for Dasein in its 
very Being.! Thus as Being-with, Dasein ‘is’ essentially for the sake of 
Others. ‘This must be understood as an existential statement as to its 
essence. Even if the particular factical Dasein does not turn to Others, and 
supposes that it has no need of them or manages to get along without 
them, it zs in the way of Being-with. In Being-with, as the existential “‘for- 
the-sake-of”’ of Others, these have already been disclosed in their Dasein. 
With their Being-with, their disclosedness has been constituted before- 
hand; accordingly, this disclosedness also goes to make up significance— 
that is to say, worldhood. And, significance, as worldhood, is tied up with 
the existential “‘for-the-sake-of-which”’.* Since the worldhood of that world 
in which every Dasein essentially is already, is thus constituted, it accord- 
ingly lets us encounter what is environmentally ready-to-hand as some- 
thing with which we are circumspectively concerned, and it does so in 
such a way that together with it we encounter the Dasein-with of Others. 
The structure of the world’s worldhood is such that Others are not 
proximally present-at-hand as free-floating subjects along with other 
‘Things, but show themselves in the world in their special environmental 
Being, and do so in terms of what is ready-to-hand in that world. 

Being-with is such that the disclosedness of the Dasein-with of Others 


akin to ‘Nachsicht’, means to ‘inspect’ or ‘check’ something; but it often means to do this 


in a very perfunctory manner, and this latter sense may well be the one which Heidegger 
has in mind. 


i’... zum Scin des Daseins, um das es thm in seinem Sein selbst geht .. .’ 
The older editions have ‘darum’ instead of ‘um das’. 


2 ‘Diese mit dem Mitsein vorgängig konstituierte Erschlossenheit der Anderen macht 
‚demnach auch die Bedcutsamkeit, d.h. die Weltlichkeit mit aus, als welche sic im 


existenzialen Worum-willen festgemacht ist.” The word ‘sie’ appears only in the later 
editions. 


I. 4 Being and Time 161 


belongs to it; this means that because Dasein’s Being is Being-with, its 
understanding of Being already implies the understanding of Others. 
This understanding, like any understanding, is not an acquaintance 
derived from knowledge about them, but a primordially existential kind 
of Being, which, more than anything else, makes such knowledge and 
acquaintance possible.! Knowing oneself [Sichkennen] is grounded in 
Being-with, which understands primordially. It operates proximally in 
accordance with the kind of Being which is closest to us—Being-in-the- 
world as Being-with; and it does so by an acquaintance with that which 
Dasein, along with the Others, comes across in its environmental circum- 
spection and concerns itself with—an acquaintance in which Dasein 
understands. Solicitous concern is understood in terms of what we are 
concerned with, and along with our understanding of it. Thus in con- 
cernful solicitude the Other is proximally disclosed. i 

But because solicitude dwells proximally and for the most part in the 
deficient or at least the Indifferent modes (in the indifference of passing 
one another’ by), the kind of knowing-oneself which is essential and 
closest, demands that one become acquainted with oneself.? And when, 
indeed, one’s knowing-oneself gets lost in such ways as aloofness, hiding 
oneself away, or putting on a disguise, Being-with-one-another must 
follow special routes of its own in order to come close to Others, or even 
to ‘see through them’ [“‘hinter sie” zu kommen]. 

But just as opening oneself up [Sichoffenbaren] or closing oneself off is 
grounded in one’s having Being-with-one-another as one’s kind of Being 
at the time, and indeed is nothing else but this, even the explicit dis- 
closure of the Other in solicitude grows only out of one’s primarily Being 
with him in each case. Such a disclosure of the Other (which is indeed 
thematic, but not in the manner of theoretical psychology) easily becomes 
the phenomenon which proximally comes to view when one considers the 
theoretical problematic of understanding the ‘psychical life of Others’ 
[fremden Seelenlebens’’]. In this phenomenally ‘proximal’ manner it 
thus presents a way of Being with one another understandingly; but at 
the same time it gets taken as that which, primordially and ‘in the 
beginning’, constitutes Being towards Others and makes it possible at all. 


1 ‘Dieses Verstehen ist, wie Verstehen überhaupt, nicht eine aus Erkennen erwachsene 
Kenntnis, sondern eine ursprünglich existenziale Seinsart die Erkennen und Kenntnis 
allererst möglich macht’. While we have here translated ‘Kenntnis’ as ‘acquaintance’ and 


‘Erkennen’ as ‘knowledge about’, these terms must not be understood in the special ` 


senses exploited by Lord Russell and C. I. Lewis. The ‘acquaintance’ here involved is of 
the kind which may be acquired whenever one is well informed about something, whether 
one has any direct contact with it or not. 

2‘, . . bedarf das nächste und wesenhafte Sichkennen eines Sichkennenlernens.’ 
‘Sichkennen’ (‘knowing oneself’) is to be distinguished sharply from ‘Selbsterkenntnis’ 
(‘knowledge of the Self’), which will be discussed on H. 146. See our note 1, p. 186. 

F 


124 


125 


x 


162 Being and Time 1.4 


This phenomenon, which is none too happily designated as ‘empathy’ 
[‘‘Einftihlung’], is then supposed, as it were, to provide the first onto- 
logical bridge from one’s own subject, which is given proximally as alone, 
to the other subject, which is proximally quite closed off. 

Of course Being towards Others is ontologically different from Being 


towards Things which are present-at-hand. The entity which is ‘other’ 


has itself the same kind of Being as Dasein. In Being with and towards 
Others, there is thus a relationship of Being [Seinsverhältnis] from Dasein 
to Dasein. But it might be said that this relationship is already constitutive 
for one’s own Dasein, which, in its own right, has an understanding of 
Being, and which thus relates itself! towards Dasein. The relationship-of- 
Being which one has towards Others would then become a Projection? 
of one’s own Being-towards-oneself ‘into something else’. The Other 
would be a duplicate of the Self. 

But while these deliberations seem obvious enqugh, it is easy to see that 
they have little ground to stand on. The presupposition which this argu- 
ment demands—that Dasein’s Being towards an Other is its Being towards 
itself—fails to hold. As long as the legitimacy of this presupposition has not 
turned out to be evident, one may still be puzzled as to how Dasein’s 
relationship to itself is thus to be disclosed to the Other as Other. 

Not only is Being towards Others an autonomous, irreducible relation- 
ship of Being: this relationship, as Being-with, is one which, with Dasein’s 
Being, already is.? Of course it is indisputable that a lively mutual 
apgnamtaneehip on the basis of Being-with, often depends upon how far 
one’s own Dasein has understood itself at the time; but this means that it 
depends only upon how far one’s essential Being wiih Others has made 
itself transparent and has not disguised itself.* And that is possible only if 
Dasein, as Being-in-the-world, already is with Others, ‘Empathy’ does not 
first constitute Being-with; only on the basis of Being-with does ‘empathy’ 
become possible: it gets its motivation from the unsociability of the 
dominant modes of Being-with.® 


1‘... sich... verhält...’ We have often translated this expression as ‘comports’ 
itself’, compromising between two other possible meanings: ‘relates itself” and ‘behaves 
or ‘conducts itself”. In this passage, however, and in many others where this expression is 
tied up with ‘Verhältnis’ (‘relationship’) rather than with ‘Verhalten’ (‘behaviour or 
‘conduct’}, 0 ‘relates itself’ seams appropriate, 

4 ‘Projektion’, ‚Here we are dealing with ‘projection’ in the familiar psychological sense, 
not in the sense which would be expressed by ‘Entwurf’. See H. 145 ff. 

3“Das Sein zu Anderen ist nicht nur ein eigenständiger, irreduktibler Seinsbezug, er 
ist a Mitsein mit dem Sein des Daseins schon seiend.’ 


4°. . .-wie weit es das wesenhafte Mitsein mit anderen sich durchsichtig gemacht 
und nicht verstellt hat...’ (The older editions have ‘... sich nicht’ undurchsichtig 
gemacht und verstellt hat...’ .) 


6 * *Einfühlung” konstituiert nicht erst das Mitsein, sondern ist auf dessen Grunde 
erst möglich und durch die vorherrschenden defizienten Modi des Mitseins in ihrer 
Unumgänglichkeit motiviert.’ 


I. 4 Being and Time 163 

But the fact that ‘empathy’ is not a primordial existential phenomenon, 
any more than is knowing in general, does not mean that there is nothing 
problematical about it. The special hermeneutic of empathy will have to 
show how Being-with-one-another-and Dasein’s knowing of itself are led 
astray and obstructed by the various possibilities of Being which Dasein itself 
possesses, so that a genuine ‘understanding’ gets suppressed, and Dasein 
takes refuge in substitutes; the possibility of understanding the stranger 
correctly presupposes such a hermeneutic as its positive existential 
condition.? Our analysis has shown that Being-with is an existential con- 
stituent of Being-in-the-world. Dasein-with has proved to be a kind of 
Being which entities encountered within-the-worid have as their 
own. So far as Dasein is at all, it has Being-with-one-another as its kind 
of Being. This cannot be conceived as a summative result of the occur- 
rence of several ‘subjects’, Even to come across a number of ‘subjects’ 
[einer Anzahl von ‘“‘Subjekten’’] becomes possible only if the Others who 
are concerned proximally in their Dasein-with are treated merely as 
‘numerals’ [‘““Nummer’’]. Such a number of ‘subjects’ gets discovered only 
by a definite Being-with-and-towards-one-another. This ‘inconsiderate’ 
Being-with ‘reckons’ [“‘rechnet”j with the Others without seriously 
‘counting on them’ [auf sie zählt”], or without even wanting to ‘have 
anything to do’ with them. 

One’s own Dasein, like the Dasein-with of Others, is encountered 
proximally and for the most part in terms of the wiili-world with which we 
are environmentally concerned. When Dasein is absorbed in the world 
of its concern—that is, at the same tirae, in its Being-with towards Others 
—it is not itscli. Who is it, then, who has taken over Being as everyday 
Being-with-one-another? 


T 27, Everyday Being-one’s-Seif and the “They” 

The ontologically relevant result of our analysis of Being-with is the 
insight that the ‘subject character’ of one’s own Dasein and that of Others 
is to be defined existentially—that is, in terms of certain ways in which 
one may be. In that with which we concern ourselves environmentally 
the Others are encountered as what they are; they are what they do [sie 
sind das, was sie betreiben]. 

In one’s concern with what one has taken hold of, whether with, for, 
or against, the Others, there is constant care as to the way one differs 
from them, whether that difference is merely one that is to be evened out, 
whether one’s own Daseir has lagged behind the Others and wants to 


1*,.. welche positive existenziale Bedingung rechtes Fremdverstehen für seine Möglich- 
keit voraussetzt.’ We have construed ‘welche’ as referring back to ‘Hermeneutik’, though 
this is not entirely clear. 


126 


127 


i 
| 


d 


164 Being and Time I. 4 
catch up in relationship to them, or whether one’s Dasein already has 
some priority over them and sets out to keep them suppressed. The care 
about this distance between them is disturbing to Being-with-one-another, 
though this disturbance is one that is hidden from it. If we may express 
this existentially, such Being-with-one-another has the character of 
distantiality [Abstdndigkett]. The more inconspicuous this kind of Being is 
to everyday Dasein itself, all the more stubbornly and primordially does 
it work itself out. 

But this distantiality which belongs to Being-with, is such that Dasein, 
as everyday Being-with-one-another, stands in subjection [Botmdssigkeit] to 
Others. It itself is not;! its Being has been taken away by the Others. 
Dasein’s everyday possibilities of Being are for the Others to dispose of 
as they please. These Others, moreover, are not definite Others. On the 
contrary, any Other can represent them. What is decisive is just that 
inconspicuous domination by Others which bas already been taken over 
unawares from Dasein as Being-with. One belongs to the Others oneself and 
enhances their power. “The Others’ whom one thus designates in order to 
cover up the fact of one’s belonging to them essentially oneself, are those 


who proximally and for the most part ‘are there’ in everyday Being-with- 


one-another. The “who” is not this one, not that one, not oneself [man 
selbst], not some people [einige], and not the sum of them all. The ‘who’ 
is the neuter, the “they” [das Man]. 

We have shown earlier how in the environment which lies closest to us, ` 
the public ‘environment’ already is ready-to-hand and is also a matter 
of concern [mitbesorgt]. In utilizing public means of transport and 
in making use of information services such as the newspaper, every Other 
is like the next. This Being-with-one-another dissolves one’s own Dasein 
completely into the kind of Being of ‘the Others’, in such a way, indeed, 
that the Others, as distinguishable and explicit, vanish moreand more. In this 
inconspicuousness and unascertainability, the real dictatorship of the “they” 


: is unfolded. We take pleasure and enjoy ourselves as they [man] take 


pleasure; we read, see, and judge about literature and art as they see and 
judge; likewise we shrink back from the ‘great mass’ as they shrink back; 
we find ‘shocking’ what they find shocking. The “they”, which is nothing 
definite, and which all are, though not as the sum, prescribes the kind of 
Being of everydayness. 

The “they” has its own ways in which to be. That tendency of Being- 
with which we have called “‘distantiality” is grounded in the fact that 
Being-with-one-another concerns itself as such with averageness, which is 
an existential characteristic of the “they”. The “they”, in its Being, 

1 ‘Nicht ea selbst ist; ... .’ 


I. 4 Being and Time 165 
essentially makes an issue of this. Thus the “they” maintains itself factic- 
ally in the averageness of that which belongs to it, of that which it regards 
as valid and that which it does not; and of that to which it grants success 
and that to which it denies it. In this averageness with which it prescribes 
what can and may be ventured, it keeps watch over everything exceptional 
that thrusts itself to the fore. Every kind of priority gets noiselessly sup- 
pressed. Overnight, everything that is primordial gets glossed over as 
something that has long been well known. Everything gained by a struggle 
becomes just something to be manipulated. Every secret loses its force. 
This care of averageness reveals in turn an essential tendency of Dasein 
which we call the “levelling down” [Einebnung] of all possibilities of Being. 

Distantiality, averageness, and levelling down, as ways of Being for the 
“they”, constitute what we know as “publicness’ [“‘die Offentlichkeit’’]. 
Publicness proximally controls every way in which the world and Dasein 
get interpreted, and it is always right—not because there is some distinc- 
tive and primary relationship-of-Being in which it is related to ‘Things’, 
ar because it avails itself of some transparency on the part of Dasein which 
it has explicitly appropriated, but because it is insensitive to every differ- 
ence of level and of genuineness and thus never gets to the ‘heart of the 
matter’ [auf die Sachen”]. By publicness everything gets obscured, and 
what has thus been covered up gets passed off as something familiar and 
accessible to everyone. 

The “they” is there alongside everywhere [ist überall dabei], but in, 
such a manner that it has always stolen away whenever Dasein presses, 
for a decision. Yet because the “they” presents every judgment and deci- 
sion as its own, it deprives the particular Dasein of its answerability. The 
“they” can, as it were, manage to have ‘them’ constantly invoking it.! 
It can be answerable for everything most easily, because it is not someone 
who needs to vouch for anything. It ‘was’ always the “they”? who did it, 
and yet it can be said that it has been ‘no one’. In Dasein’s everydayness 
the agency through which most things come about is one of which we 
must say that “it was no one”. 

Thus the particular Dasein in its everydayness is disburdened by the 
“they”. Not only that; by thus disburdening it of its Being, the “they” 
accommodates Dasein ae oa es Se e Dar 128 
has any tendency to take things easily and make them easy. And be- 
cause the “they” constantly accommodates the particular Dasein by dis- 


n, 


dominion., 
Everyone is the other, and no one is himself. The “they”, which supplies 
1 ‘Das Man kann es sich gleichsam leisten, dass “man” sich ständig auf es beruft.’ 


29 


ee |. ey 


—____- 


166 Being and Time I. 4 


the answer to the question of the “who” of everyday Dasein, is the 
“nobody” to whom every Dasein has already surrendered itself in Being- 
mong-one-other [Untereinandersein]. 

In these characters of Being which we have exhibited—everyday Being- 
among-one-another, distantiality, averageness, levelling down, public- 
ness, the disburdening of one’s Being, and accommodation—lies that 
‘constancy’ of Dasein which is closest to us. This “‘constancy”’ pertains not ~ 
to the enduring Being-present-at-hand of something, but rather to Dasein’s 
kind of Being as Being-with. Neither the Self of one’s own in nor the 
Self of the Other has as yet found itself or lost itself as Tong as it is [seiend] 


in the modes we have mentioned In these modes ope’s-way_of Being is 
that of inauthenticity and failure to stand b *s Self.! To be in this 
way signifies no lessening of Dasein’s facticity, just as the “they”, as the 
“nobody”, is by no means nothing at all. On the contrary, in this kind 
of Being, Dasein is an ens realissimum, if by ‘Reality’ we understand a 
Being with the character of Dasein. i 

Of course, the “they” is as little present-at-hand as Dasein itself. The 
more openly the “they” behaves, the harder it is to grasp, and the slier it 
is, but the less is it nothing at all. If we ‘see’ it ontico-ontologically with 
an unprejudiced eye, it reveals itself as the ‘Realest subject’ of everyday- 
ness. And even if it is not accessible like a stone that is present-at-hand, 
this is not in the least decisive as to its kind of Being. One may neither 
decree prematurely that this “they” is ‘really’ nothing, nor profess the 
opinion ‘that one can Interpret this phenomenon ontologically by some- 
how ‘explaining’ it as what results from taking the Being-present-at-hand- 
together of several subjects and then fitting them together. On the contrary, 
in working out concepts of Being one must direct one’s course by these 
phenomena, which cannot be pushed aside. 

Furthermore, the “they” is not something like a ‘universal subject’ which 
a plurality of subjects have hovering above them. One can come to take 
it this way only if the Being of such ‘subjects’ is understood as having a 
character other than that of Dasein, and if these are regarded as cases of 
a genus of occurrents—cases which are factually present-at-hand. With 
this approach, the only possibility ontologically is that everything which is 
not a case of this sort is to be understood in the sense of genus and species. 
The ‘‘they” is not the genus to which the individual Dasein belongs, nor. 
can we come across it in such entities as an abiding characteristic. That 
even the traditional logic fails us when confronted with these phenomena, 
is Not surprising if we bear in mind that it has its foundation’ in an 


1 ‘Man ist in der Weise der Unselbstandigkeit und Uneigentlichkeit.’ On ‘Standigkeit’ 
and "Unselbständigkeit’ see our note 1, p. 153, H. 117 above. ‘ 


I.4 Being and Time 167 
ontology of the present-at-hand—an ontology which, moreover, is still a 
rough one. So no matter in how many ways this logic may be improved 
and expanded, it cannot in principle be made any more flexible. Such 
reforms of logic, oriented towards the ‘humane sciences’, only increase the 
ontological confusion. 

The “they” isan existentiale; and as a primordial phenomenon, it belongs to 
Dasein’s positive constitution. It itself has, in turn, various possibilities of 
becoming concrete as something characteristic of Dasein [seiner daseins- 
mässigen Konkretion]. The extent to which its dominion becomes com- 
pelling and explicit may change in the course of history. 

The Self of everyday Dasein is the thep-self,* which we distinguish from 
the authentic Self—that is, from the Sel i old of in 
its own way [eigens ergriffenen]. As s they-self, the particular Dasein has 
been, dispersed into the “they”, and n ‚must first find itself. This dispersal 
characterizes the ‘subject’ © ing which we know as con- 
cernful absorption in the wor!d we encounter as closest to us. If Dasein 
is familiar with itself as they-self, this means at the same time that the 


ne mma 


a totality y of in A with which the “they” i is familiar, and within the 
limits which have been established with the “‘they’s” averageness. Proxi- 
mally, factical Dasein is in the with-world, which is discovered in an average 
way..Proximally, it is not ‘I’, in the sense of my own Self, that ‘am’, but 
rather the Others, whose way is that of the “‘they’’.? In n terms of the “they” : 
and as che ey I am- given’ proximally to ‘myself’ [mir “selbst”]. 

Proximally Dasei en If 


Dasein discovers the world in its o wn way [eigens] and brings it close, if it, 
discloses to itself its. its own authentic Being, then this is discovery of of 1 the. ‘world! 


0 


and this disclosure « of Dasein are: always accomplished as a clearing, 


with which Dasein bars its own way. | 
With this ; Interpretation ‘of Being-with and Being-one’s-Self in the 


1‘... das Man-selbst . . .‘ This expression is also to be distinguished from ‘das Man 
selbst’ (' ‘the “they” itself” ), which appears elsewhere in this paragraph. In the first of these 
expressions ‘selbst’ appears as a substantive, in the second as a mere intensive. 

‘Das Man selbst, worum-willen das Dasein alltäglich ist, artikuliert den Verweisungs- 
zusammenhang der Bedeutsamkeit.’ It is also possible to construe ‘alltäglich’ as a pre- 
dicate bro aie after ‘ist’; in that case we should read: ‘Dasein is everyday for the sake 
of the 44 29 9 
RER. Zinächst “bin” nicht “ich” im Sinne des eigenen Selbst, sondern die Anderen in der 

Weise des Man.’ In the earlier editions there are commas after ‘ “ich” ’ and ‘Anderen’ ; 
which would suggest a somewhat different interpretation. 


130 


168 Being and Time I. 4 


“they”, the question of the “who” of the everydayness of Being-with-one- 
another is answered. These considerations have at the same time brought 
us a concrete understanding of the basic constitution of Dasein: Being-in- 
the-world, in its everydayness and its averageness, has become visible. 
From the kind of Being which belongs to the “‘they”—the kind which 
is closest—everyday Dasein draws its pre-ontological way of interpreting 
its Being. In the first instance ontological Interpretation follows the 
tendency to interpret it this way: it understands Dasein in terms of the 
world and comes across # as an entity within-the-world. But that is not all: 
even that meaning of Being on the basis of which these ‘subject’ entities 
[diese seienden “Subjekte”] get understood, is one which that ontology 
of Dasein which is ‘closest’ to us iets itself present in terms of the ‘world’. 


But because the phenomenon of the world itself gets passed over in this , 


absorption in the world, its place gets taken [tritt an seine Stelle] by what 
is present-at-hand within-the-world, namely, Things. The Being of those 
entities which are there with us, gets conceived as presence-at-hand. Thus 
by exhibiting the positive phenomenon of the closest everyday Being-in- 
the-world, we have made it possible to get an insight into the reason why 
an ontological Interpretation of this state of Being has been missing. This 
very state of Being,} in its everyday kind of Being, ts what proximally misses itself 
and covers itself up. 

If the Being of everyday Being-with-one-another is already different 
in principle from pure presence-at-hand—in spite of the fact that it is 
seemingly close to it ontologically—still less can the Being of the authentic 
Self be conceived as presence-at-hand. Authentic Being-one’s-Self does not 
rest upon an exceptional condition of the subject, a condition that has 
been -detached from the “they”; it ts rather an existentiell modification of the 
“they” — of the “they” as an essential existentiale. 

But in that case there is ontologically a gap separating the selfsameness 
of the authentically existing Self from the identity of that “I” which 
maintains itself throughout its manifold Experiences. 

1 We interpret Heidegger’s pronoun ‘Sie’ as referring to ‘Seinsverfassung’ (‘state of 


Being’); but there are other words in the previous sentence to which it might refer with 
just as much grammatical plausibility, particularly ‘Interpretation’. 


“ea 


V $ 
BEING-IN AS SUCH 


4 28. The Task of a Thematic Analysts of Being-in 

In the preparatory stage of the existential analytic of Dasein, we have for 
our leading theme this entity’s basic state, Being-in-the-World. Our first 
aim is to bring into relief phenoracnally the unitary primordial structure of 
Dasein’s Being, in terms of which its possibilities and the ways for it ‘to be’ 
are ontologically determined. Up ull now, our phenomenal characterization 
of Being-in-the-world has been directed towards the world, as a structural 
item of Being-in-the-world, and has atte:apted te provide an answer to the 
question about the “who” of this entity in its everydayness. But even in 
first marking out the tasks of a preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein, 
we have already provided an advance crieniation as to Bemg-in as such,! 
and have illustrated it in the concrete inode of knowing the world." 

The fact that we foresaw this structural item which carries so much 
weight, arose from our aim ofsetting the analysis of single items, froun the out- 
cet, within the frame of a steady preliminary view of the structural whole, 
and of guarding against any disruption or fragmentation of the unitary 
phenomenon. Now, keeping in mind what has been achieved in theconcrete 
analysis of the world and the “who”, we must turn our Interpretation 
back to the phenomenon of Being-in. By considering this more penetrat- 
ingly, however, we shall not only get a new and surer phenomenological 
view of the structural totality of Being-in-the-world, but shall also pave 
the way to grasping the primordial Being of Dasein itself—namely, care. 

But what more is there to point out in Being-in-the-world, beyond the 
essential relations of Being alongside the world (concern), Being-with 
(solicitude), and Being-one’s-Seli (“who”) ? If need be, there still remains 
the possibility of broadening out the analysis by characterizing com- 


paratively the variations of concern and its circumspection, of solicitude- 


and the considerateness which goes with it; there is also the possibility of 
contrasting Dasein with entities whose character is not that of Dasein by 
a more precise explication of the Being of all possible entities within-the- 


131 


132 


170 Being and Time 1.5 
world. Without question, there are unfinished tasks still lying in this field. 
What we have hitherto set forth needs to be rounded out in many ways 
by working out fully the existential a priori of philosophical anthropology 
and taking a look at it. But this is not the aim of our investigation. Its 


aim is one of fundamental ontology. Consequently, if we inquire about Being-in ' 


as our theme, we cannot indeed consent to nullify the primordial character 
of this phenomenon by deriving it from others—that is to say, by an 
inappropriate analysis, in the sense of a dissolving or breaking up. But 
the fact that something primordial is underivable does not rule out the 
possibility that a multiplicity of characteristics of Being may be con- 
stitutive for it. If these show themselves, then existentially they are 
equiprimordial. The phenomenon of the eguiprimordiality of constitutive 
items has often been disregarded in ontology, because of a methodologic- 
ally unrestrained tendency to derive everything and anything from some 
simple ‘primal ground’. 

In which direction must we look, if we are to characterize Being-in, 
as such, phenomenally? We get the answer to this question by recalling 
what we were charged with keeping phenomenologically in view when we 
called attention to this phenomenon: Being-in is distinct from the present- 
at-hand insideness of something present-at-hand ‘in’ something else that 
is present-at-hand ; Being-in is not a characteristic that is effected, or even 


just elicited, in a present-at-hand subject by the ‘world’s’ Being-present- 


at-hand; Being-in is rather an essential kind of Being of this entity itself. 
But in that case, what else is presented with this phenomenon than the 
commercium which is present-at-hand between a subject present-at-hand and 
an Object present-at-hand? Such an interpretation would come closer 
to the phenomenal content if we were to say thac Dasein is the Being of this 
‘between’. Yet to take our orientation from this ‘between’ would still be 
misleading. For with such an orientation we would also be covertly 
assuming the entities between which this ‘‘between’’, as such, ‘is’, and we 
would be doing so in a way which is ontologically vague. The “between” 
is already conceived as the result of the convenientia of two things that are 
present-at-hand. But to assume these beforehand always splits the phenom- 
enon asunder, and there is no prospect of putting it together again from 
the fragments. Not only do we lack the ‘cement’; even the ‘schema’ in 
accordance with which this joining-together is to be accomplished, has 
been split asunder, or never as yet unveiled. What is decisive for ontology 
is to prevent the splitting of the phenomenon—in other words, to hold its 
positive phenomenal content secure. To say that for this we need far- 
reaching and detailed study, is simply to express the fact that something 
which was ontically self-evident in the traditional way of treating the 


1. 5 Being and Time 171 
‘problem of knowledge’ has often been ontologically disguised to the point 
where it has been lost sight of altogether. 

The entity which is essentially constituted by Being-in-the-world is 
itself in every case its ‘there’. According to the familiar signification of the 
word, the ‘there’ points to a ‘here’ and a ‘yonder’. There ‘here’ of an 
‘I-here’ is always understood in relation to a ‘yonder’ ready-to-hand, in 
the sense of a Being towards this ‘yonder’—a Being which is de-severant, 
directional, and concernful. Dasein’s existential spatiality, which thus 
determines its ‘location’, is itself grounded in Being-in-the-world. The 
“yonder” belongs definitely to something encountered within-the-world. 
‘Here’ and ‘yonder’ are possible only in a ‘there’—that is to say, only if 
there is ın entity which has made a disclosure of spatiality as the Being of 
the ‘there’. This entity carries in its ownmost Being the character of not 
being closed off. In the expression ‘there’ we have in view this essential 
disclosedness. By reason of this disclosedness, this entity (Dasein), together 
with the Being-there! of the world, is ‘there’ for itself. 

When we talk in an ontically figurative way of the lumen naturale in 
man, we have in mind nothing other than the existential-ontological 
structure of this entity, that it is in such a way as to be its “there”. To say 
that it is ‘illuminated’ Br ers that as Being-in-the-world 
it is cleared [gelichtet] in itself, not through any other entity, but in such 
a way that it is itself the clearing.* Only for an entity which is existentially 
cleared in this way does that whiciı is present-at-hand become accessible in 
the light or hidden in the dark. By its very nature, Dasein brings its “there” 
along with it. If it lacks its “there”, it is not factically the entity which is 
essentially Dasein; indeed, it is not this entity at all. Dasein is its disclosedness. 

We are to set forth the Constitution of this Being. But in so far as the 
essence of this entity is existence, the existential proposition, “Dasein zs its 
disclosedness’, means at the same time that the Being which is an issue for 
this entity in its very Being is to be its ‘there’. In addition to characterizing 
the primary Constitution of the Being of disclosedness, we will require, in 
conformity with the course of the analysis, an Interpretation of the kind 
of Being in which this entity is its ‘““there”’ in an everyday manner. 

This chapter, in which we shall undertake the explication of Being-in as 
such (that is to say, of the Being of the ‘‘there’’), breaks up into two parts: 
A. the existential Constitution of the “there” ; B. the everyday Being of the 
“there”, and the falling of Dasein. 

In understanding and state-of-mind, we shall see the two constitntive ways 


1‘ Da»sein’. See our note 1, p. 27, H. 7 above. 

3 ‘Lichtung’. This word is customarily used to stand for a ‘clearing’ in the woods, not 
for a ‘clarification’; the verb ‘lichten’ is similarly used. The force of this passage lies in the 
fact that these words are cognates of the noun ‘Licht’ (‘light’). 


133 


134 


172 Being and Time I.5 
of being the “there”; and these are equiprimordial. If these are to be 
analysed, some phenomenal confirmation is necessary; in both cases this 
will be attained by Interpreting some concrete mode which is important 
for the subsequent problematic. State-of-mind and understanding are 
characterized equiprimordially by discourse. 

Under A (the existential Constitutuon of the “‘there”’) weshallaccordingly 
treat: Being-there as state-of-mind (Section 29) ; fear as a mode of state-of- 
mind (Section 30) ; Being-there as understanding (Section 31) ; understand- 
ing and interpretation (Section 32) ; assertion as a derivative mode of inter- 
pretation (Section 33) ; Being-there, discourse, and language (Section 34). 

The analysis of the characteristics of the Being of Being-there is an 
existential one. This means that the characteristics are not properties of 
something present-at-hand, but essentially existential ways to be. We 
must therefore set forth their kind of Being in everydayness. 

Under B (the everyday Being of the “‘there”, and the falling of Dasein) we 
shall analyse idle talk (Section 35), curiosity (Section 36), and ambiguity 
(Section 37) as existential modes of the everyday Being of the “there”; 
we shall analyse them as corresponding respectively to the constitutive 
phenomenon of discourse, the sight which lies in understanding, and 
the interpretation (or explaining [Deutung]) which belongs to understand- 
ing. In these phenomenal modes a basic kind of Being of the “there” will 
become visible—a kind of Being which we Interpret as falling; and this 
‘falling’ shows a movement [Bew-gthcit] which is existentially its own.! 


A. The Existential Constitution of the ‘‘ There” 
T 29. Being there as State-of-mind 
What we indicate ontologically by the term “state-of-mind’”? is ontically 
the most familiar and everyday sort of thing; our mood, our Being- 


attuned.® Prior to all psychology of moods, a field which in any case still 


1 While we shall ordinarily reserve the word ‘falling’ for ‘Verfallen’ (see our note 2, 
p. 42, H. a1 above), in this sentence it represents first “Verfallen’ and then ‘Fallen’, the 
usual German word for ‘falling’. ‘Fallen’ and ‘Verfallen’ are by no means strictly synony- 
mous; the latter generally has the further connotation of ‘decay’ or ‘deterioration’, though 
Heidegger will take pains to point out that in his own usage it ‘does not express any 
negative evaluation’. See Section 38 below. 

‘Befindlichkeit’. More literally: ‘the state in which one may be found’. (The common 

u ‘Wie befinden Sie sich?’ means simply ‘How are you?’ or ‘How are 

you feeling ?’) Our translation, ‘state-of-mind’, comes fairly close to what is meant; but 

it should be made clear that the ‘of-mind’ belongs to English idiom, has no literal counter- 

part in the structure of the German word, and fails to bring out the important connotation 
of finding oneself. 

8‘ . . die Stimmung, das Gestimmtsein.’ The noun ‘Stimmung’ originally means the 
tuning of a musical instrument, but it has taken on several other meanings and is the 
usual word for one’s mood or humour. We shall usually translate it as ‘mood’, and we 
shall enerally translate both ‘Gestimmtsein’ and ‘Gestimmtheit’ as ‘having a mood’, 
though sometimes, as in the present sentence, we prefer to call attention to the root 
metaphor of ‘Gestimmtsein’ by writing ‘Being-attuned’, etc. 


I. 5 Being and Time 173 
lies fallow, it is necessary to see this phenomenon as a fundamental 
existentiale, and to outline its structure. 

Both the undisturbed equanimity and the inhibited ill-humour of our 
everyday concern, the way we slip over from one to the other, or slip off 
into bad moods, are by no means nothing ontologically,! even if these 
phenomena are left unheeded as supposedly the most indifferent and 
fleeting in Dasein. The fact that moods can deteriorate [verdorben wer- 
den] and change over means simply that in every case Dasein always has 
some mood [gestimmt ist]. The pallid, evenly balanced lack of mood 
[Ungestimmtheit], which is often persistent and which is not to be 
mistaken for a bad mood, is far from nothing at all. Rather, it is in this 
that Dasein becomes satiated with itself. Being has become manifest as 
a burden. Why that should be, one does not know. And Dasein cannot know 
anything of the sort because the possibilities of disclosure which belong to 
cognition reach far too short a way compared with the primordial 
disclosure belonging to moods, in which Dasein is brought before its 
Being as “there”. Furthermore, a mood of elation can alleviate the 
manifest burden of Being; that such a mood is possible also discloses the 
burdensome character of Dasein, even while it alleviates the burden. 
A mood makes manifest ‘how one is, and how one is faring’ [‘‘wie 
einem ist und wird’’}. In this ‘how one is’, having a mood brings Being to 

s “there”. 

In having a mood, Dasein is always disclosed moodwise as that entity 
to which it has been delivered over in its Being; and in this way it has 
been delivered over to the Being which, in existing, it has to be. “To be 
disclosed” does not mean “‘to be known as this sort of thing”. And even 
in the most indifferent and inoffensive everydayness the Being of Dasein 
can burst forth as a naked ‘that it is and has to be’ [als nacktes “Dass es 
est ist und zu sein hat’’]. The pure ‘that it is’ shows itself, but the “whence” 
and te ‘‘whither” remain in darkness. The fact that it is just as everyday 
a matter for Dasein not to ‘give in’ [“nachgibt”] to such moods—in 
other words, not to follow up [nachgeht] their disclosure and allow itself to 
be brought before that which is disclosed—is no evidence against the 
phenéenenal facts of the case, in which the Being of the “there” is dis- 
closed moodwise in its “‘that-it-is”;? it is rather evidence for it. In an 


1 In this sentence ‘equanimity’ represents ‘Gleichmut’, ‘ill-humour’ represents ‘Miss- 
mut’, and ‘bad moods’ represents “Verstimmungen’. 

20. den phanomenalen Tatbestand der stimmungsmassigen Erschlossenheit des 
Seins des Da in seinem Dass . . . It would be more literal to write simply ‘in its 
“that” ’; but to avoid a very natural confusion between the conjunction ‘that’ aid 
pronoun ‘that’, we shall translate ‘das Dass’ as ‘the “‘that-it-is” °, even though we use 
the same expression unhyphenated for ‘das ‘Dass es ist” ’ in this paragraph and in that 
which follows. (The striking contrast between the ‘Da’ and the ‘Dass’ is of course lost in 
translation. ) 


135 


174 Being and Time I. 5 


ontico-existentiell sensc, Dasein for the most part evades the Being which 
is disclosed in the mood. In an ontologico-existential sense, this means that 
even in that to.which such a mood pays no attention, Dasein is unveiled 
in its Being-delivered-over to the “there”. In the evasion itself the “there” 
ts something disclosed. 

This characteristic of Dasein’s Being—this ‘that it is’—is veiled in its 
“whence” and “‘whither’’, yet disclosed in itself all the more unveiledly ; 
we call it the “‘thrownness’’! of this entity into its “there”; indeed, it is 
thrown in such a way that, as Being-in-the-world, it is the “there”. The 
expression ‘‘thrownness” is meant to suggest the facticity of its being 
delivered over.* The ‘that it is and has to be’ which is disclosed in Dasein’s 
state-of-mind is not the same ‘that-it-is’ which expresses ontologico- 
categorially the factuality belonging to presence-at-hand. This factuality 
becomes accessible only if we ascertain it by looking at it. The ‘‘that-it-is”’ 
which is disclosed in Dasein’s state-of-mind must rather be conceived as 
an existential attribute of the entity which has Being-in-the-world as its 
way of Being. Factictty is not the factuality of the factum brutum of some- 
thing present-at-hand, but a characteristic of Dasein’s Betng—one which has been 
taken up into existence, even if proximally it has been thrust asıde. The “‘that-it-is”’ 
of facticity never becomes something that we can come across by behold- 
ing it. 

An entity of the character of Dasein is its “there” in such a way that, 
whether explicitly or not, it finds itself [sich befindet] in its thrownness. 
In a state-of-mind Dasein is always brought before itself, and has 
always found itself, not in the sense of coming across itself by perceiving 
itself, but in the sense of finding itself in the mood that it has.? As an entity 
which has been delivered over to its Being, it remains also delivered over 
to the fact that it must always have found itself—but found itself in a 
way of finding which arises not so much from a direct seeking as rather 
from a fleeing. The way in which the mood discloses is not one in which 
we look at thrownness, but one in which we turn towards or turn away 
[An- und Abkehr]. For the most part the mood does not turn towards 
the burdensome character of Dasein which is manifest in it, and least of all 
does it do so in the mood of elation when this burden has been alleviated. 
It is always by way of a state-of-mind that this turning-away is what it is. 


1 ‘Geworfenhet?. This important term, which Heidegger introducés here, is further 
discussed in Section 38. 

2‘Der Ausdruck Geworfenheit soll die Faktizitat der Uberantwortung andeuten.’ On the 
distinction between ‘facticity’ and ‘factuality’, see H. 56 above. 

3 In this sentence there is a contrast between ‘wahrnehmendes Sich-vorfinden’ (‘coming 
across itself by perceiving’) and ‘gestimmtes Sichbefinden’ (‘finding itself in the mood 
that it has’). In the next sentence, on the other hand, ‘found’ and ‘finding’ represent 
‘gefunden’ and ‘Finden’. 


I. 5 Being and Time 175 


Phenomenally, we would wholly fail to recognize both what mood 
discloses and fou: it discloses, if that which is disclosed were to be com- 
pared with what Dasein is acquainted with, knows, and believes ‘at the 
same ume’ when it has such a mood. Even if Dasein is ‘assured’ in its 
belief about its ‘whither’, or if, in rational euligh eninent, it supposes 
itself to know about its “whence”, all this rount W nothing as against 
the phenomenal tacis of the case: for the mood brings Dasein before the 
‘“that-tt-is” of its “there, which, as such, stares it in the face with the 
Inexorability of an enigma. t From the cxistential-ontological point cf view, 
there is not the slightest justification for minimizing what is ‘evident’ in 
states-of-mind, by measuring it against the apodictic certainty of a theo- 
retical cognition of something which is purely present-at-hand. However 


the phenomena are no less ee they are banished to the ERS 
ms wart 
irra 


tuary cf the irrational. When Onalisın, as the counterplay of ration- 
alism, talks about the things to which rationalism is blind, it does so only 
with a squint. 

Factically, Dasein can, should, and must, through knowledge and will, 
become master of its moods; in certain possible ways of existing, this may 
signify a priority of volition and cognition. Only we must not be misled 
by this into denying that ontologically mood is a primordial kind of Being 
for Dasein, in which Dasein is disclosed to itself prior to all cognition and 
volition, and beyond their range of disclosure. And furthermore, when we 
master a mood, we do so by way of a counter-mood; we are never free 
of moods. Ontologically, we thus obtain as the first essential characteristic 
of states-of-mind that they disclose Dasein in tts thrownness, and—proxtmally and 
Jor the most part—in the manner of an evasive iurning-away. 

From what has been said we can see already that a state-of-mind is 
very remote from anything like coming across a psychical condition by 
the kind of apprehending which first turns round and then back. Indeed 
it is so far from this, that only because the “there” has already been dis- 
closed in astate-of-mind can immanent reflection come across ‘Experiences’ 
at all. The ‘bare mood’ discloses the ““there’”’ more primordially, but corre- 
spondingly it closes it off more stubbornly than any not-perceiving. 

This is shown by bad moods. In these, Dasein becomes blind to itself, 
the environment with which it is concerned veils itself, the circumspection 
of concern gets led astray. States-of-mind are so far from being reflected 
upon, that precisely what they do is to assail Dasein in its unreflecting 
devotion to the ‘world’ with which it is concerned and on which it expends 


1‘... so verschlägt das alles nichts gegen den phänomenalen Tatbestand, dass die 
Stimmung das Dasein vor das Dass seines Da bringt, als welches es ihm in unerbittlicher 
Rätselhaftigkeit entgegenstarrt.’ The pronoun ‘es’ (the reference of which is not entirely 
unambiguous) appears only in the later editions. 


137 


176 j Being and Time 1.5 
itself. A mood assails us. It comes neither from ‘outside’ nor from ‘inside’, 
but arises out of Being-in-the-world, as a way of such Being. But with the 
negative distinction between state-of-mind and the reflective appre- 
hending of something ‘within’, we have thus reached a positive insight 
into their character as disclosure. The mood has already disclosed, in every 
case, Being-in-the-world as a whole, and makes it possible first of all to direct one- 
self towards something. Having a mood is not related to the psychical in the 
first instance, and is not itself an inner condition which then féathes forth 
in an enigmatical way and puts its mark on Things and persons. It is in 
this that the second essential characteristic of states-of-mind shows itself. 
We have seen that the world, Dasein-with, and existence are equipymordt- 
ally disclosed; and state-of-mind is a basic existential species of theik dis- 
closedness, because this disclosedness itself is essentially Being-in-the-world.! 

Besides these two essential characteristics of states-of-mind which have 
been explained—the disclosing of thrownness.and the current disclosing 
of Being-in-the-world as a whole—we have to notice a third, which con- 
tributes above all towards a more penetrating understanding of the world- 
hood of the world. As we have said earlier, the world which has already 
been disclosed beforehand permits what is within-the-world to be en- 
countered. This prior disclosedness of the world belongs to Being-in and 
is partly constituted by one’s state-of-mind.: Letting something be en- 
countered is primarily circymspective; it is not just sensing something, or 
staring at it. It implies chit pectivé, concern, and has the character of 
becoming affected in some way [Betroffenwerdens] ; we can see this more 
precisely from the standpoint of state-of-mind. But to be affected by the 
unserviceable, resistant, or threatening character [Bedrohlichkeit] of that 
which is ready-to-hand, becomes ontologically possible only in so far as 
Being-in as such has been determined existentially beforehand in such a 
manner that what it encounters within-the-world can ‘“‘matter’’ to it in 
this way. The fact that this sort of thing can “matter” to it is grounded in 
one’s state-of-mind; and as a state-of-mind it has already disclosed the 
world—as something by which it can be threatened, for instance.” Only 
something which is in the state-of-mind of fearing (or fearlessness) can 
discover that what is environmentally ready-to-hand is threatening. 
Dasein’s openness to the world is constituted existentially by the attune- 
ment of a state-of-mind. ; ‘= 

And only because the ‘senses’ [die ‘‘Sinne’’] belong ontologically to an 


1<, . . weil diese selbst wesenhaft In-der-Welt-sein ist.’ It is not clear whether the 
antecedent of ‘diese’ is Existenz’ (‘existence’) or ‘Erschlossenheit’ (‘disclosedness’). 

2 ‘Diese Angänglichkeit gründet in der Befindlichkeit, als welche sie die Welt zum 
Beispiel auf Bedrohbarkeit hin erschlossen hat.’ The pronoun ‘sie’ appears only in the 
newer editions. 


I.5 Being and Time 177. 


entity whose kind of Being is Being-in-the-world with a state-of mind, ? can 
they be ‘touched’ by anything or ‘have a sense for’ [“‘Sinn h ‘ven für”] 


something in such a way that what touches them shows itself in .n affect. A a? 
N, 


Under the strongest pressure and resistance, nothing like an af‘ sct woul 
come about, and the resistance itself would remain essentiaily undis- 
covered, if Being-in-the-world, with its state-of-mind, had not already 
submitted itself [sich schon angewiesen] to having entities v ithin-the- 
world “‘matter” to it in a way which its moods have outlined 1: advance. 
Existentially, a state-of-mind implies a disclosive submission to the world, out of 
which we can encounter something that matters to us. Indeed from the ontological 
point of view we must as à general principle leave the primary discovery of 
the world to “bare mood’. Pure beholding, even if it were to pe 1etrate to 
the innermost core of the Being of something present-at-hand, could never 
discover anything like that which is threatening. 

The fact that, even though states-of-mind are primarily disclosive, every- 
day circumspection goes wrong and to a large extent succumbs to delusion 
because of them, is a pù ôv [non-being] when measured against the idea 
of knowing the ‘world’ absolutely. But if we make evaluations which are 
so unjustified ontologically, we shall completely fail to recognize the 
existentially positive character of the capacity for delusion. It is precisely 
when we see the ‘world’ unsteadily and fitfully in accordance with our 
moods, that the ready-to-hand shows itself in its specific worldhood, which 
is never the same from day to day. By looking at the world theoretically, 
we have already dimmed it down to the uniformity of what is purcly 
present-at-hand, though admittedly this uniformity comprises a new 
abundance of things which can be discovered by simply characterizing 
them. Yet even the purest dewpia [theory] has not left all moods behind 
it; even when we look theoretically at what is just present-at-hand, it does 
not show itself purely as it looks unless this dewpia lets it come towards us 
in a tranquil tarrying alongside... , in paoróvy and &ıaywyn.iY Any cogni- 
tive determining has its existential-ontological Constitution in the state-of- 
mind of Being-in-the-world; but pointing this out is not to be confused 
with attempting to surrender science ontically to ‘feeling’. 


1 ‘befindlichen In-der-Welt-seins’. In previous chapters we have usualiy translated 
‘befindlich’ by such expressions as ‘which is to be found’, etc. See, for instance, H. 67, 70, 
117 above, where this adjective is applied to a number of things which are hardly of the 
character of Dasein. In the present chapter, however, the word is tied up with the special 
sense of ‘Befindlichkeit’ as ‘statc-of-mind’, and will be translated by expressions such as 
‘with a state-of-mind’, ‘having a state-of-mind’, etc. 

2 In this sentence Heidegger has been calling attention to two ways of using the word 
‘Sinn’ which might well be expressed by the word ‘sense’ but hardly by the word ‘mean- 
ing’: (1) ‘die Sinne’ as ‘the five senses’ or the ‘senses’ one has when one is “in one’s senses’; 
(2) ‘der Sinn’ as the ‘sense’ one has ‘for’ something—one’s ‘sense for clothes’, one’s ‘sense 
of beauty’, one’s ‘sense of the numinous’, etc. Cf. the discussion of ‘Sinn’ on H. 151 f. below. 


136 


178 Being and Time : . Ls 
The different modes of state-of-mind and the ways in which they are 
interconnec:ed in their foundations cannot be Interpreted withi: the 


problemar'r of the presen: mn The phenomena have long been 


well-knov. tically und. > if ects” airi feelings” and have 

alwaysb. under consid ati Hy it is not an acciden: that 

the earl: stematic int.. «i: o affects that has come dows): tc us 

is not tee in the frame vchology’. iocos investigat. : tae 
raßn [af -] in the secors: i onis Rhetoric oe to the :radı-. 
tional or. ation, accordi: © "sich rhetoric is conceived as.the kind of 

thing we : arn in school’, th. -ex of Aristotle must we taken as the first. 
systematic <«rmieneutic of: +e ycayness of Being with one another. 

Pyblicnes:. +o the kind of Br. ww veh belongs to the “they” (Cf. Section 

27), not ois, has in gener: wa way of having a mood, but needs 

moods and *:nakes’ them or: © + ‘i is into such a mood and out of such 

a mood that the orator spes |> mast understard the possibilities of 

mooc: in order to rouse thar 6-1 ate them aright, 


Hov the Interpretation ofic. affects was carried further in the Stoa, 
and how i. was handed down to modern times through patristic and 
scholastic theology, is well known. What has escaped notice is that the 
basic ontolcgical Interpretation of the affective life in general has been able 
to make scarcely one forward step worthy of mention since Aristotle. On 
the contrary, affects and feelings corne under the theme of psychical 
phexomena, functioning as a third class of these, usually along with idea- 
tion [Vorstelien] and volition. They sink to the level of accompanying 
phenomena. 

It has been one of the merits of phenomenological research that it has 
again brought these phenomena inore unrestrictedly into our sight. Not 
only that: Scheler, accepting the challenges of Augustine and Pascal,’ 
has guided the problematic to a considcration of how acts which ‘repre- 
sent’ and acts which ‘take an interest’ are interconnected in their founda- 
tions. But even here the existential-ontological foundations of the 
phenomenon of the act in general are admittedly still obscure. 

A state-of-mind not only discloses Dasein in its thrownness and its 
submission to that world which is already disclosed with its own Being; 
it is itself the existential kind of Being in which Dasein constantly sur- 
renders itself to the ‘world’ and lets the ‘world’ “matter” to it im such a 
way that somehow Dasein evades its very self. The existential constitution 
of such evasion will become clear in the phenomenon of falling. 

A statc-of-mind is a basic existential way in which Dasein is its “there”. 
It not only characterizes Dasein ontologically, but, because of what it 
discloses, it is at the same time methodologically significant in principle 


I.5 Being ard Time 179 


for the existential analytic. Like any ontological Interpretation whatso- 
ever, this analytic can only, so to speak, “listen in’ to some previously 
disclosed entity as regards its Being. And it will attach itself to Dasein’s 
distinctive and most für-reaching possibilities of disclosure, in order to 
get information about this entity from these. Phenomenological Inter- 140 
pretation must make it possible for Dasein itself to disclose things primord- 
ially; it must, as it were, let Dasem interpret itself. Such Interpretation 
takes part in this disclesure only in order to raise to a conceptual level the 
„„henomenal content of what has been disclosed, and to do so existentially. 

Later (Cf. Section 40)! we shall provide an Interpretation of anxiety 
as such a basic state-of-minc of Dascin, and as one which issignificant from 
the existential-ontological standpoint: with this in view, we shall now 
illustrate the phenomenon of state-of-mind even more concretely in its 
determinate mode of fear. 


€ 30. Fear as a Mode of Siate-of- Mind 


There are three points of view trom which the phenomenon of fear may 
be considered. We shall analyse: (1} that in the face of which we tear, 
(2) fearing, and (3) that about which we fear. These possible wavs of 
looking at fear are not accidental: they belong together. With them the 
general structure of states-of-mind comes to tlıe fore. We shall complete 
our analysis by alluding to the possible ways in which fear may be 
modified ; each of these pertains to different items in the structure of fear. 

That in the face of which we fear, the ‘fearsome’,? is in every case some- 
thing which we encounter within-the-world and which may have cither 
readiness-to-hand, presence-at-hand, or Dasein-wit': as its kind of Being. 
We are not going to make an ontical report on those entities which can 
often and for the most part be ‘fearsome’: we are to define the fearsome 
phenomenally in its fearsomeness. What do we encounter in fearing that 
belongs to the fearsome as such? That in the face of which we fear can 
be characterized as threatening. Here several points must be considered. 
1. What we encounter has detrimentality as its kind of involvement, It 

~shows itself within a context of involvements, 2. The target of this detri- 
mentality is a definite range of what can be affected by it; thus the detri- 
mentality is itself made definite, and come: from a definite region. 3. The 
region itself is well known as such, and so is that which is coming from it; 
but that which is coming from it has something ‘queer’ about it.” 4. That 
which is detrimental, as something that threatens us, is not yet within 


1 The earliest editions cite Section 39 rather than Section 40. This has been corrected 
in the list of errata. 

2 ‘Das Wover der Furcht, das Furchtbarc.. .’ 

8°... mit dem cs nicht “*gechcuer” ist.’ 


141 


180 Being and Time I.5 


striking distance [in beherrschbarer Nähe], but it is coming close. In such 
a drawing-close, the detrimentality radiates out, and therein lies its 
threatening character. 5. This drawing-close is within what is close by. 
Indeed, something may be detrimental in the highest degree and may even 
be coming constantly closer; but ifit is still far off, its fearsomeness remains 
veiled. If, however, that which is detrimental draws close and is close by, 
then it is threatening: it can reach us, and yet it may not. As it draws close, 
this ‘it can, and yet in the end it may not’ becomes aggravated. We say, 
“It is fearsome”. 6. This implies that what is detrimental as coming- 
close close by carries with it the patent possibility that it may stay away 
and pass us by; but instead of lessening or extinguishing our fearing, this 
enhances it. 

In fearing as such, what we have thus characterized as threatening is 
freed and allowed to matter to us. We do not first ascertain a future evil 
(malum futurum) and then fear it. But neither does fearing first take note 
of what is drawing close; it discovers it beforehand in its fearsomeness. 
And in fearing, fear can then look at the fearsome explicitly, and ‘make it 
clear’ to itself. Circumspection sees the fearsome because it has fear as its 
state-of-mind. Fearing, as a slumbering possibility of Being-in-the-world 
in a state-of-mind (we call this possibility ‘fearfulness’ [‘‘Furchtsamkeit’’]), 
has already disclosed the world, in that out of it something like the fear- 
some may come close. The potentiality for coming close is itself freed by 
the essential existential spatiality of Being-in-the-world. 

That which fear fears about is that very entity which is afraid—Dasein.! 
Only an entity for which in its Being this very Being is an issue, can be 
afraid. Fearing discloses this entity as endangered and abandoned to 
itself. Fear always reveals Dasein in the Being of its “there”, even if it 
does so in varying degrees of explicitness. If we fear about our house and 
home, this cannot be cited as an instance contrary to the above definition 
of what we fear about; for as Being-in-the-world, Dasein is in every case 
concernful Being-alongside.” Proximally and for the most part, Dasein is 


1 ‘Das Worum die Furcht fürchtet, ist das sich fürchtende Seiende selbst, das 
Dasein.’ While it is convenient to translate ‘das Worum der Furcht’ as ‘that which one 
fears about’, this expression must be taken in a narrower sense than one would ordinarily 
expect in English. What Heidegger generally has in mind is rather the person on whose 
behalf or for whose sake one fears. (Cf. our remarks on ‘um’ in note 1, p. 93, H. 65, and 
note 2, p. 98, H. 69 above.) Thus ‘fürchten um’ comes closer to the ordinary meaning 
of ‘fear for’ than it oe to that of ‘fear about’. We shall soon see, however, that Heidegger 
also uses the expression ‘fürchten für’, for which ‘fcar for’ would seem to be the natural 
translation. Notice that what he then has in mind—namely, our fearing for Others—is 
only a special case of ‘fearing for’ in the ordinary English sense, and likewise only a special 
case of what we shall call ‘fearing about’ in this translation. 

2 ‘Sein bei’. Here our usual translation, ‘Being-alongside’, fails to bring out the con- 
nection. A German reader would recall at once that ‘bei’ may mean, ‘at the home of’ like 
the French ‘chez’. See our note 3, p. 80, H. 54 above. 


I.5 Being and Time 181 


in terms of what it is concerned with. When this is endangered, Being- 
alongside is threatened. Fear discloses Dasein predominantly in a privative 
way. It bewilders us and makes us ‘lose our heads’, Fear closes off our 
endangered Being-in, and yet at the same time lets us see it, so that when 
the fear has subsided, Dasein must first find its way about again. 

Whether privatiyely or positi ely, fearing about something, as being- 
afraid in the face\oß something; älways discloses equiprimordially entities 
within-the-world and Being-in—-the former as threatening and the latter 
as threatened. Fear is a mode of state-of-mind. 

One can also fear about Others, and we then speak of ‘‘fearing for” 
them [Fiirchten fiir sie]. This fearing for the Other does not take away his 
fear. Such a possibility has been rvled out already, because the Other, 
‚for whom we fear, need not fear at all on his part. It is precisely when the 
Other is not afraid and charges recklessly at what is threatening him that 
we fear most for him. Fearing-for is a way of having a co-state-of-mind 
with Others, but not necessarily a being-afraid-with or even a fearing- 
with-one-another.! One can ‘fear about” without “being-afraid’’. Yet 
when viewed more strictly, fearing-about is “being-afraid-for-oneself”.? 
Here what one “is apprehensive about” is one’s Being-with with the 
Other, who might be torn away from one.® That which is fearsome is not 
aimed directly at him who fears with someone else. Fearing-about knows 
that in a certain way it is unaffected, and yet it is co-affected in so far as 
the Dasein-with for which it fears is affected. Fearing-about is therefore 
not a weaker form of being-afraid. Here the issue is one of existential 
modes, not of degrees of ‘feeling-tones’. Fearing-about does not lose its 
specific genuiness even if it is not ‘really’ afraid. 

There can be variations in the constitutive items of the full phenomenon 
‚of fear. Accordingly, different possibilities of Being emerge in fearing. 
Bringing-close close by, belongs to the structure of the threatening as 
encounterable. If something threatening breaks in suddenly upon :on- 
dernful Being-in-the-world (something threatening in its ‘not right = vay, 
but any moment’), fear becomes alarm [Erschrecken]. So, in wi:.: is 
threatening we must distinguish between the closest way in whio. it 
brings itself close, and the manner in which this bringing-close ‚sets 
encountered—its suddenness. That in the face of which we are atavn:erl is 
proximally something well known and familiar. But if, on the other |. ad, 


1 ‘Fürchten für. . ist eine Weise der Mitbefindlichkeit mit den Andere: . ber «cht 
notwendig ein Sich- naitlürchten oder gar eis Miteinanderfürchten.’ l l 
2 tein Sichfürchten’, We have hitherto translated ‘sich fürchten’ with varity. fis of 


‘be afraid’, which is its usual signification in ordinary German. In this passage ou er, 
the emphasis on the reflexive pronuun ‘sich’ clearly ealls for ‘being-afraid-for-; g’. 

3 < “Befurchtet” ist dabei das Mitsein mit dem Anderen, der einem entr: ¿1 werden 
könnte.’ 


142 


43 


182 Being and Time 15 
that which threatens has the character of something altogether unfamiliar, 
then fear hecomes dread [Granent. And where that which threatens is laden 
with dread, and is at the sume titie encountered with the suddenness of 
the alarming, then fear becomes errer [Entsetzen]. There are further 
variations cf fear, which we know as timidity, ee misgiving, becom- 
ing startled. All modifications of fear, as possibilities of having a state-of- 
mind, point to the fact that Dasein as Being-in-uic-world is ‘fearful 
[“furchtsam”]. This ‘fearfniness’ is not to be understood in an ontical 
sense as some factical ‘individualized’ disposition, ? bat as an existential 
possibility of the essential stace-of-mind of Dasein in general, though of 
course it is not the only one. 


4 37. Being-ihere as Understanding 

State-of-mind is one of the existential structures m which the Being of 
the ‘there’ maintains itself. Equiprimordial with it in constituting this 
Being is uzderstanding. A statc-of-ınınd aiways his ats understanding, even 
if it mereiv keeps it suppressed. Understanding always has its mood. If 
we Interpret understanding as a fundamental existentiale, this indicates 
that this naenomenon je conceived as a basic made of Dasein’s Being. On 
the other hand, understanding in the sense ui on: vossible kind of cog- 
nizing among others (as distinguished, for insti e, from ‘explaining’), 
met, Eke explaining, be ipterpoeted as an existent! ‘al derivative of that 
piiinary derstanding wbic is ane of the vorsutuents of the Being of 
the “there? in general. 

We have, alter all. alicady come wp against tiis primordial under- 
standing m our previous investigations, thougt we did not allow it to be 
included explieitiy in the theme under discussion. To sav that in existing, 
Dasein is its “there”, is equivalent to saying that the world is ‘there’; its 
Being-there is Being-in. And the latter is likewise ‘there’, as that for the sake 
of which Dasein is. In the “tor-the-sake-of-which’’, existing Being-m-the- 
world is disclosed as such, and this disclosedness we have called ‘‘under- 
standing’ Vil In the understanding of the “for-the-sake-of-which”, the 
senifcance which is grounded therein, is disclesed along with it. The 
diselosech:ess of understanding, as the disclosedness of the ‘“‘for-the-sake- 
of-wbich” and of significance equiprimordially, pertains to the entirety of 
Being-in-the-world. Significance is tnat on the basis of which the world is 
disciosed as such. To say that the “for-the-sake-of-which” and significance 
arc botn disclosed in Dasein, means that Dasein is that entity which, as 
Being-in-the-world, is an issue for itself. 


1*... i ontischen Sinne einer faktischen, “‘vereinzelten” Veranlagung . . .’ While the 
verb ‘vereinzeln” often means ‘tu isolate’, Heidegger does not ordinarily use it in this 
sense. Indeed he contrasts it with the verb ‘isolieren’. Cf. H. 188 below. 


I.5 Being and Time 183 


When we are talking ontically we sometimes use the expression ‘under- 
standing something’ with the signification of ‘being able to manage 
something’, “being a match for it’, “being competent to do something’.! 
In understanding, as an existentiale, that which we have such competence 
over is not a ‘‘what’’, but Being as existing. The kind of Being which 
Dasein has, as potentiality-for-Being, lies existentially in understanding. 
Dasein is not something present-at-hand which possesses its competence 
for something by way of an extra; it is primarily Being-possible. Dasein is 
in every case what it can be, and in the way in which it is its possibility. 
The Being-possible which is essential for Dasein, pertains to the ways of 
its solicitude for Others and of its concern with the ‘world’, as we have 
characterized them; and in all these, and always, it pertains to Dasein’s 
potentiality-for-Being towards itself, for the sake of itself. The Being- 
possible which Dasein is existentially in every case, is to be sharply 
distinguished both from empty logical possibility and from the contingency 
of something present-at-hand, so far as with the present-at-hand this or 
that can ‘come to pass’.* As a modal category of presence-at-hand, 
possibility signifies what is not yet actual and what is not at any time necessary. 
It characterizes the merely possible. Ontologically it is on a lower level than 
actuality and necessity. On the other hand, possibility as an existentiale is 
the most primordial and ultimate positive way in which Dasein is 
characterized ontologically. As with existentiality in general, we can, in 
the first instance, only prepare for the problem of possibility. The phenom- 
enal basis for seeing it at all is provided by the understanding as a dis- 
closive potentiality-for-Being. 

Possibility, as an existentiale, does not signify a free-floating potentiality- 
for-Being in the sense of the ‘liberty of indifference’ (libertas indıfferentiae). 
In every case Dasein, as essentially having a state-of-mind, has already 
got itself into definite possibilities. As the potentiality-for-Being which is 
is, it has let such possibilities pass by; it is constantly waiving the pos- 
sibilities of its Being, or else it seizes upon them and makes mistakes.* But 
this means that Dasein is Being-possible which has been delivered over to 
itself—thrown possibility through and through. Dasein is the possibility of 
Being-free for its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. Its Being-possible is 
transparent to itself in different possible ways and degrees. 

Understanding is the Being of such potentiality-for-Being, which is 


1° ..in der Bedeutung von “einer Sache vorstehen können”, “ihr gewachsen sein”, 
“etwas können”? The expression ‘vorstehen’ (‘to manage’, ‘to be in charge’) is here 
connected with ‘verstehen’ (‘to understand’). 

2‘,..von der Kontingenz eines Vorhandenen, sofern mit diesem das und jenes “pas- 
sieren” kann.’ 


. ergreift sie und vergreift sich.’ 


144 


145 


184 Being and Time l.5 
never something still outstanding as not yet present-at-hand, but which, 
as something which is essentially never present-at-hand, ‘ts’ with the 
Being of Dasein, in the sense of existence. Dasein is such that in every case 
it has understood (or alternatively, not understood) that it is to be thus or 
thus. As such understanding it ‘knows’ what it is capable of—that is, what 
its potentiality-for-Being is capable of.! This ‘knowing’ does not first arise 
from an immanent self-perception, but belongs to the Being of the “there”, 
which is essentially understanding. And only because Dasein, in under- 
standing, is its “there”, can it go astray and fail to recognize itself. And 
in so far as understanding is accompanied by state-of-mind and as such is 
existentially surrendered to thrownness, Dasein has in every case already 
gene astray and failed to recognize itself. In its potentiality-for-Being it 
is therefore delivered over to the possibility of first finding itself again in 
its possibilit‘es. 

Understanding is the existential Being of Dasein’s own potentiality-for-Being ; 
and it is so in such a way that this Being discloses in itself what its Being ts capable 
of.* We must grasp the structure of this existentiale more precisely. 

As a disclosure, understanding always pertains to the whole basic 
state of Being-in-the-world. As a potentiality-for-Being, any Being-in is a 
potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world. Not only is the world, qua world, 
disclosed as possible significance, but when that which is wilhinithe- 
world is itself freed, this entity is freed for its own possibilities. That which 
is ready-to-hand is discovered as such in its serviceability, its’usability, and 
its detrimentality. The totality of involvements is revealed as the categorial 
whole of a possible interconnection of the ready-to-hand. But even the 
‘unity’ of the manifold present-at-hand, of Nature, can be discovered 
only if a possibility of it has been disclosed. Is it accidental that the question 
about the Being of Nature aims at the ‘conditions of its possibility ? On 
what is such an inquiry based? When confronted with this inquiry, we 
cannot leave aside the question: why are entities which are not of the 
character of Dasein understood in their Being, if they are disclosed in 
accordance with the conditions of their possibility? Kant presupposes 
something of the sort, perhaps rightly. But this presupposition itself 
is something that cannot be left without demonstrating how it is 
justified, 

Why does the understanding—whatever may be the essential dimen- 
sions of that which can be disclosed in it—always press forward into 
possibilities? It is because the understanding has in itself the existential 


1 ‘Als solches Verstehen ‘ “weiss” cs, woran es mit ihm selbst, das heisst scinem Sein- 
können ist.’ 


2‘, .. so zwar, dass dieses. Sein an ihm selbst das Woran des mit ihm selbst Seins erschliesst.’ 


I.5 Being and Time 185 


structure which we call “‘projection’”’.1 With equal primordiality the under- 
standing projects Dasein’s Being both upon its “for-the-sake-of-which” 
and upon significance, as the worldhood of its current world. The char- 
acter of understanding as projection is constitutive for Being-in-the-world 
with regard to the disclosedness of its existentially constitutive state-of- 
Being by which the factical potentiality-for-Being gets its leeway 
[Spielraum]. And as thrown, Dasein is thrown into the kınd of Being 
which we call “projecting”. Projecting has nothing to do with comporting 
oneself towards a plan that has been thought out, and in accordance with 
which Dasein arranges its Being. On the contrary, any Dasein has, as 
Dasein, already projected itself; and as long as it is, it is projecting. As 
long as it is, Dasein always has understood itself and always will under- 
stand itself in terms of possibilities. Furthermore, the character of under- 
standing as projection is such that the understanding does not grasp 
thematically that upon which it projects—that is to say, possibilities. 
Grasping it in such a manner would take away from what is Projected its 
very character as a possibility, and would reduce it to the given contents 
which we have in mind; wheréas projection, in throwing, throws before 
itself the possibility as possibility, and lets it be as such.? As projecting, 
understanding is the kind of Being of Dasein in which it. is its possibilities 
as possibilities. 

Because of the kind of Being which is constituted by the existentiale of 
projection, Dasein is constantly ‘more’ than it factually is, supposing that 
one might want to make an inventory of it as something-at-hand and list 
the contents of its Being, and supposing that one were able to do so. But 
Dasein is never more than it factically is, for to its facticity its potentiality- 
for-Being belongs essentially. Yet as Being-possible, moreover, Dasein is 
never anything less; that is to say, it is existentially that which, in its 


1 ‘Entuwnf’. The basic meaning of this noun and the te verb ‘entwerfen’ is that of 
‘throwing’ something ‘off’ or ‘away’ from one; but in ordinary German usage, and often 
in Heidegger, they take on the sense of ‘designing’ or ‘sketching’ some ‘project’ which is to 
be carried through; and they may also be used i in the more special sense of‘ projection’ in 
which a geometer is said to ' project’ a curve ‘upon’ a plane, The words ‘projection’ and 
Sates accordingly lend hemele rather well to translating these words in many 
especially since their root meanings are very similar to those of ‘Entwurf’ and 
‘entwerfen; but while the root meaning of ‘throwing off’ `s still very much alive in 
‚it bas almost entitely died out in th ordinary English usage of 
ject’, which in turn have taken on some connotations not felt in the 
ga ‘thas y when in the English translation Dasein is said to ‘project’ entities, or 
possibilities, or even its own Being ‘upon’ something; the reader should bear in mind 
hat the root meaning of ‘t+ ~wing’ is more strongly felt in the German than in the 
translation. 
. zieht es herab zu einem benen, gemeinten Bestand, während der Entwurf im 
Werten die Möglichkeit als Mögli jegcb keit sich vorwirft und als solche sein lässt.’ The expres- 
sion ‘einem etwas vorwerfen’ means literally to ‘throw something forward to someone’, 
but often has the connotation of ‘reproaching him with something’, or ‘throwing some- 
thing in his teeth’. Heidegger may have more than one of these significations i in mind. 


186 Being and Time L 5 


potentiality-for-Being, it is not yet. Only because the Being of the “there” 
reccives its Constitution through understanding and through the char- 
acter of understanding as projection, only because it is what it becomes (or 
alternatively, does not become), can it say to itself ‘Become what you are’, 
and say this with understanding. 

Projection always pertains to the full disclosedness of Being-in-the- 
world; as potentiality-for-Being, understanding has itself possibilitics, 
which are sketched out beforehand within the range of what is essentially 
disclosable in it. Understanding can devote itself primarily to the dis- 
closeduess of the world; that is, Dasein can, proximally and for the nost 
part, understand itself in terms of its world. Or else understanding throws 
itself primarily into the “‘for-the-sake-of-which”’; that is, Dasein exists as 
itself. Understanding is either authentic, arising out of one’s own Self as 
such, or inauthentic. The ‘in-’ of “inauthentic? does not mean that 
Dasein cuts itself off from its Self and understands ‘only’ the world. The 
world belongs to Being-one’s-Self as Being-in-the-world. On the other 
hand, authentic understanding, no less than that which is inauthentic, 
can be either genuine or not genuine. As potentiality-for-Being, under- 
standing is altogether permeated with possibility. When one is diverted 
into [Sichverlegen in] one of these basic possibilities of understanding, the 
other is not laid aside [legt ... nicht ab]. Because understanding, in every case, 
pertains rather to Dasein’s full disclosedness as Being-in-the-world, this diversion 
of the understanding !s an existential modification of projection as a whole. In under- 
standing the world, Being-in is always unclerstood along with it, while 
understanding of existence as such is always an understanding of the world. 

As factical Dasein, any Dasein has already diverted its potentiality-for- 
Being into a possibility of understanding, 

In its projective character, understanding goes to make up existentially 
what we call Dasein’s “sight” [Sicht]. With the disclosedness of the “there”, 
this sight is existentially [existenzial seiende]; and Dasein is this sight 
equiprimordially in each of those basic ways of its Being which we have 
already noted: as the circumspection |Umsicht] of concern, as the con- 
siderateness [Riicksicht] of solicitude, and as that sight which is directed 
upon Being as such [Sicht auf das Sein als solches], for the sake of which 
any Dasein is as it is. The sight which is related primarily and on the whole 
to existence we call “transparency” [Durchsichtigkeit]. We choose this term 
to designate ‘knowledge of the Self’! in a sense which is well understood, 


1 * Selbsterkenntn:s” ’. This should be caretuly distinguished from the ‘Sichkennen’ 
discussed on H. 124-125. Perhaps this distine Gun can be expressed—though rather crudely 
——by pointing out that we are here concerned with a full and sophisticated knowledge of 
the Self in all its implications, while in the earlier passage we were concerned with the 
kind of ‘self-knowledge’ which one loses wheu one ‘forgets oneself’? or does something so 
out of character that one ‘no longer knows oneself’. 


I. 5 Being and Time 187 


so as to indicate that here it is not a matter of perceptualiv tacking down 
and inspecting a point called the “Self”, but rather one oi *cizıng upon the 
full disclosedness of Being-in-the-world throughout all the copstitutive items 
which are essential to it, and doing so with understanding. In existing, 
entities sight ‘themselves’ [sichtet “sich”’] only in so far as they have 
become transparent to themselves with equal primordiality in those items 
which are constitutive for their existence: their Being-alongside the 
world and their Being-with Others. 

On the other hand, Dasein’s opaqueness [Undurchsichtiekeit] is not 
rooted primarily and solely in ‘egocentric’ self-deceptions: it is rooted just 
as much in lack of acquaintance with the world. 

We must, to be sure, guard against a misunderstanding of the expression 
‘sight’, It corresponds to the “‘clearedness” |Gelichtetheit] which we took 
as characterizing the disclosedness of the “there”. ‘Seeing’ does not mean 
Just perceiving with the bodily eves, but neither does it mean pure non- 
sensory awareness of something prescut-at-hand in its presence-at-hand. 
In giving an existential signification tu “sight”, we have merely drawn 
upon the peculiar feature of secing, that it lets entities which are accessible 
to it be encountered unconcealedly in themselves. Of course, every ‘sense’ 
does this within that domain of discovery which is genuinely its own, But 
from the beginning onwards the tradition of philosophy has bcen oriented 
primarily towards 'sceing’ as a way of access to entities and to Being. To 
kecp the connection with this tradition, we may formalize “sight” and 
“seeing” enough to obtain therewith a universal tenn for characterizing 
any access to entities or to Being, as access in gencral. 

By showing how all sight is grounded primariiy in understanding (the 
circumspection of concern is understanding us common sense [Verstdndig- 
keit]), we have deprived pure intuition [Anschauen] of is priority, which 
corresponds noetically to the priority of the present-at-hand in traditional 
ontology. ‘Intuition’ and ‘thinking’ are both derivatives of understanding, 


and already rather remote ones. Even the phenomenological ‘intuition of 


essences’ [“‘Wesensschau”’] is grounded in existential understanding. We 
can decide about this kind of seeing only if we have obtained explicit 
conceptions of Being and of the structure of Being, such as ouly phenomena 
in the phenomenological sense can become. 

_ The disclosedness of the “there” in understanding is itself a way of 
"Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being. In the way in which its Being is projected 
‘both upon the “‘for-the-sake-ci-which” and upon significance (the world), 
there lies the disclosedness of Being in general. Understanding of Being 
has already been taken for granted in projecting upon possibilities. In 
projection, Being is understood, though not ontologically conceived. An 


147 


188 Being and Time I. 5 


entity whose kind of Being is the essential projection of Being-in-the- 
world has understanding of Being, and has this as constitutive for its Being. 
What was posited dogmatically at an earlier stageYili now gets exhibited 
in terms of the Constitution of the Being in which Dasein as understanding 
is its “there”. The existential meaning of this understanding of Being 
cannot be satisfactorily clarified within the limits of this investigation 
except on the basis of the Temporal Interpretation of Being. 

As existentialia, states-of-mind and understanding characterize the 
primordial disclosedness of Being-in-the-world. By way of having a mood, 
Dasein ‘sees’ possibilities, in terms of which it is. In the projective 
disclosure of such possibilities, it already has a mood in every case. 
The projection of its ownmost potentiality-for-Being has been delivered 
over to the Fact of its thrownness into the “there”. Has not Dasein’s 
Being become more enigmatical now that we have explicated the 
existential constitution of the Being of the ‘‘there” in the sense of thrown 
projection ? It has indeed. We must first let the full enigmatical character 
of this Being emerge, even if all we can do is to come to a genuine break- 
down over its ‘solution’, and to formulate anew the question about the 
Being of thrown projective Being-in-the-world. 

But in the first instance, even if we are just to bring into view the every- 
day kind of Being in which there is understanding with a state-of-mind, 
and if we are to do so in a way which is phenomenally adequate to the full 


disclosedness of the “there”, we must work out these existentialia con- 
cretely.! 


q 32. Understanding and Interpretation? 


As understanding, Dasein proiects its Being upon possibilities. This 
Being-towards-possibilities which understands is itself a potentiality-for- 
Being, and it is so because of the way these possibilities, as disclosed, 
exert their counter-thrust [Rückschlag] upon Dasein. The projecting of 
the understanding has its own possibility—that of developing itself [sich 
auszubilden]. This development of the understanding we call “inter- 
pretation”.® In it the understanding appropriates understandingly that 
which is understood by it. In interpretation, understanding does not 
become something different. It becomes itself. Such interpretation is 
grounded existentially in understanding; the latter does not arise from the 
former. Nor is interpretation the acquiring of information about what is 


1 ‘konkreten’. The earlier editions have ‘konkreteren’ (‘more concretely’). 
2 ‘Auslegung’. See our note 3, p. 19, H. ı above. 
3 ‘Auslegung’. The older editions have ‘Auslegung’. 


I. 5 Being and Time 189 
understood; it is rather the working-out of possibilities projected in 
understanding. In .accordance with the trend of these preparatory 
analyses of everyday Dasein, we shall pursue the phenomenon of inter- 
pretation in understanding the world—that is, in inauthentic under- 
standing, and indeed in the mode of its genuineness. 

In terms of the significance which is disclosed in understanding the 
world, concernful Being-alongside the ready-to-hand gives itself to 
understand whatever involvement that which is encountered can have.! 
To say that “circumspection discovers” means that the ‘world’ which has 
already been understood comes to be interpreted. The ready-to-hand 
comes explicitly into the sight which understands. All preparing, putting to 
rights, repairing, improving, rounding-out, are accomplished in the 
following way: we take apart? in its “‘in-order-to” that which is circum- 
spectively ready-to-hand, and we concern ourselves with it in accordance 
with what becomes visible through this process. That which has been 
circumspectively taken apart with regard to its “in-order-to’”, and taken 
apart as such—that which is explicitly understood—has the structure of 
something as something. The circumspective question as to what this particu- 
lar thing that is ready-to-hand may be, receives the circumspectively 
interpretative answer that it is for such and such a purpose [es ist zum .. .]. 
If we tell what it is for [des Wozu], we are not simply designating some- 
thing; but that which is designated is understood as that as which we are 
to take the thing in question, That which is disclosed in understanding— 
that which is understood—is already accessible in such a way that its ‘as 
which’ can be made to stand out explicitly. The ‘as’ makes up the struc- 
ture of the explicitness of something that is understood. It constitutes the 
interpretation. In dealing with what is environmentally ready-to-hand 
by interpreting it circumspectively, we ‘see’ it as a table, a door, a car- 
riage, or a bridge; but what we have thus interpreted [Ausgelegte] need 
not necessarily be also taken apart [auseinander zu legen] by making an 
assertion which definitely characterizes it. Any mere pre-predicative seeing 
of the ready-to-hand is, in itself, something which already understands 
and interprets. But does not the absence of such an ‘as’ make up the 
mereness of any pure perception of something ? Whenever we see with this 
kind of sight, we already do so understandingly and interpretatively. In 
the mere encountering of something, it is understood in terms of a totality 
of involvements; and such seeing hides in itself the explicitness of the 
assignment-relations (of the “‘in-order-to””) which belong to that totality. 


1°... gibt sich... zu verstehen, welche Bewandtnis es je mit dem Begegnenden haben 
kann.’ f 

2 ‘auseinandergelegt’. Heidegger is contrasting the verb ‘auslegen’ (literally, ‘lay out’) 
with the cognate ‘auseinanderlegen’ (‘lay asunder’ or ‘take apart’). 


149 


150 


190 Being and Time l.5 


That which is understood gets Articulated when the entity to be under- 
stood is brought close interpretatively by taking as our cluc the ‘some- 
thing as something’; and this Articulation lies before [liegt vor] our making 
any thematic assertion about it. In such an assertion the ‘as’ does not 
turn up for the first time; it just gets expressed for the first time, and this 
is possible only in that it lies before us as something expressible.! The fact 
that when we look at something, the explicitness of assertion can be absent, 
does not justify our denying that there is any Articulative interpretation 
in such mere secing, and hence that there is any as-structure in it. When 
we havc to «lo with anything, the mere seeing of the Things which are 
closest to us bears in itself the structure of interpretation, and in so primor- 
dial a manner that just to grasp something free, as it were, of the “as”, 
requires a certain readjustment. When we merely stare at scmething, our 
just-having-it-before-us les before us as a failure to understand it any more. 
This grasping which is free of the “as”, is a privation of the kind of seeing 
in which one merely understands. It is not more primordial than that kind 
oi seeing, but is derived from it. 1f the ‘as’ is ontically unexpressed, this 
must not seduce us into overlooking it as a constitutive state for under- 
standing, existential and a priori. 

But if we never perceive equipment that is ready-to-hand without 
already understanding and interpreting it, and if such perception lets us 
circumspectively encounter somethin: as something, docs this not mean 
‚that in the first instance we have experienced something purely present- 
at-hand, and then taken it ss 2 door, as a hause" This would be a 
misunderstanding uf the specific way in wluch interpretation functions as 
disclosure. In interpreting, we do not, so to speak, throw a ‘signification’ 
over some naked thing which is present-at-hand, we do not stick a value 
on it; but when something within-the-world is encountered as such, the 


1°... was allein so möglich ist, dass es als Aussprechbares vor-liegt.’ Here we follow the 


reading of the earlier editions. The hyphen in ‘vor-liegt' comes at the end of the line in the 
later editions, but is undoubtedly meant to suggest (like the italicization of the ‘vor’ in 
the previous sentence) that this verb is to be interpreted with unusual literalness. 

This paragraph is noteworthy for an exploitation of the prefix ‘aus’ (‘out’), which fails 
to show up tn our translation. Literally an ‘Aussage’ (‘assertion’) is something which is 
said out’; an ‘Auslegung’ (‘interpretation’) is a ‘laying-out’; that which is ‘ausdrücklich’ 
(ex, lic’) is something that has been ‘pressed out’; that which is ‘aussprechbar’ (our 
‘expressiblc’) is something that can be ‘spoken out’. 

The verbs ‘ausdrücken’ and ‘aussprechen’ are roughly synonymous; but ‘aussprechen’ 
often has the morc specific connotations of ‘pronunciation’, ‘pronouncing oneself’, ‘speak- 
ing one’s mind’, ‘finishing what onc has to say’, etc. While it would be possible to reserve 
‘express’ for ‘ausdrücken’ and translate ‘aussprechen’ by some such phrase as ‘speak out’, 
it is more convenient to use ‘express’ for both verbs, especially since ‘aussprechen’ and its 
derivatives have occurred very seldom before the present chapter, in which ‘ausdriicken’ 
rarely appears. On the other hand, we can easily distinguish between the more frequent 
‘ausdrücklich’ and ‘ausgesprochen’ by translating the latter as ‘expressed’ or ‘expressly’, 
and reserving ‘explicit’ for both ‘ausdrücklich’ and ‘explizit’. 


I.5 Being and Time 1g! 
thing in question already has an involvement which is disclosed in our 


understanding of the world, and this involvement is one which gets laid 
out by the interpretation.! | 


The rady-to-hand is "warst siert terms of a totality of invent. 
ments (fis totality pesi ve „erde pberth by oo. athe a 
preta it. Gicm di has a, au calererctation, it receaes 
Bu caning which ‘ trom ihe background. .' 
oe vv mode in «+. dal dutiodation for evei day 
cardia Sais interpret. u y oot (nis ints pretation is groundee 
in sera veg we have in as. „en Sr inang. As the appropriation c 
unders...i: ding, the interyu ctation o "iv. ‘un Being towards a totality cf 


involve:... ts which is already wider oodo -a Being which understands. 
When +... .cthing is understood bus iss) h cited, it becom: unveiled by au 
act of a;;wopriation, and this is isa dane under tie guldance ob a 
point of view, which fixes that with-rega: te which whar is understood 1: 
to be interpreted. In every case intei pr us. seroundea nsore! mg we ot 
in advaree-—in a fore-sight. This fore-sight ‘takis the first cut’ out ef what liu 
been taken into our fore-having, and it doesso with a view to a definite wa 
in which this can be interpreted.* Anything understood which is held in our 
fore-having and towards which we set our sights ‘foresightedly’, becomes 
conceptualizable through the interpretation. In such an interpretation, 
the way in which the entity we are interpreting is to be conceived can be 
drawn from the entity itself, or the interpretation can force the entity 
into concepts to which it is opposed in its manner of Being. In either case, 
the interpretation has already decided for a definite way of conceiving it, 
either with finality or with reservations; it is grounded in something we 
grasp in advance---ın a_fore-conception. 

Whenever something is interpreted as something, the interpretation 
will be founded essentially upon fore-having, fore-sight, and fore-con- 
ception. An interpretation is never a presuppositionless apprehending cf 


I *,.. die durch die Auslegung herausgelegt wird.’ 

2 In this paragraph Heidegger introduces the important words ‘Vorhabe’, ‘Vorsicht’, 
and ‘Vorgriff’. ‘Vorhabe’ is perhaps best translated by some such expression as ‘what we 
have in advance’ or ‘what we have before us’; but we shall usually find it more convenient 
to adopt the shorter term ‘fore-having’, occasionally resorting to hendiadys, as in the 
present sentence, and we shall handle the other terms in the same manner. ‘Vorsicht’ 
(‘what we see in advance’ or ‘fore-sight’) is the only one of these expressions which occurs 
in ordinary German usage, and often has the connotation of ‘caution’ or ‘prudence’; 
Heidegger, however, uses it in a more general sense somewhat more akin to the English 
‘foresight’, without the connotation of a shrewd and accurate prediction. ‘Vorgriff’ (‘what 
we grasp in advance’ or ‘fore-conception’) is related to the verb ‘vorgreifen’ (‘to antici- 
pate’) as well as to the noun “Begriff”. 

3 ‘Die Auslegung gründet jeweils in einer Vorsicht, die das in Vorhabe Genommene auf 
eine bestimmte Auslegbarkeit hin ‘‘anschneidet’’.’ The idea seems to be that just as the 
person who cuts off the first slice of a loaf of bread gets the loaf ‘started’, the fore-sight 
‘makes a.start’ on what we have in advance—the fore-having. 


151 


192 Being and Time I. 5 


something presented to us.! If, when one is engaged in a particular con- 
crete kind of interpretation, in the sense of exact textual Interpretation, 
one likes to appeal [beruft] to what ‘stands there’, then one finds that 
what ‘stands there’ in the first instance is nothing other than the obvious 
undiscussed assumption [Vormeinung] of the person who does the 
interpreting. In an interpretative approach there lies such an assumption, 
as that which has been ‘taken for granted’ [“‘gesetzt’”’] with the interpre- 
tation as such—that is to say, as that which has been presented in our 
fore-having, our fore-sight, and our fore-conception. 

How are we to conceive the character of this ‘fore’? Have we done so if 
we say formally that this is something ‘a priori’? Why does understanding, 
which we have designated as a fundamental existentiale of Dasein, have 
this structure as its own ? Anything interpreted, as something interpreted, 
has the ‘as’-structure as its own; and how is this related to the ‘fore’ 
structure? The phenomenon of the ‘as’-structure is manifestly not to be 
dissolved or broken up ‘into pieces’, But is a primordial analytic for it 
thus ruled out? Are we to concede that such phenomena are ‘ultimates’ ? 
Then there would still remain the question, “why?” Or do the fore- 
structure of understanding and the as-structure of interpretation show an 
existential-ontological connection with the phenomenon of projection? 
And does this phenomenon point back to a primordial state of Dasein’s 
Being? 

Before we ahswer these questions, for which the preparation up till now 
has been far from sufficient, we must investigate whether what has become 
visible as the fore-structure of understanding and the as-structure of 
interpretation, does not itself already present us with a unitary phenome- 
non—one of which copious use is made in philosophical problematics, 
though what is used so universally falls short of the primordiality of 
ontological explication. 

In the projecting of the understanding, entities are disclosed in their 
possibility. The character of the possibility corresponds, on each occasion, 
with the kind of Being of the entity which is understood. Entities within- 
the-world generally are projected upon the world-—that is, upon a whole 
of significance, to whose reference-relations concern, as Being-in-the- 
world, has been tied up in advance. When entities within-the-world are 
discovered along with the Being of Dasein—that is, when they have come 
ta be understood—we say that they have meaning [Sinn]. But that which 
is understood, taken strictly is not the meaning but the entity, or 


1%. „ eines Vorgegebenen.’ Here, as in many other passages, we have translated 
‘vorgeben’ by various forms of the verb ‘to present’; but it would perhaps be more in line 
with Heidegger's discussion of the prefix ‘vor-' to write ‘. . . of something fore-given’. 


I.5 Being and Time 193 
alternatively, Being. Meaning is that wherein the intelligibility [Verstand- 
lichkeit] of something maintains itself. That which can be Articulated in a 
disclosure by which we understand, we call “meaning”. The concept of 
meaning embraces the formal existential framework of what necessarily 


belongs to that which an understanding interpretation Articulates. 


Meaning is the “‘upon-which” of a projection in terms of which something becomes 
intelligible as something ; it gets its structure from a fore-having, a fore-sight, and 
a fore-conception.! In so far as understanding and interpretation make up 
the-existential state of Being of the “there”, “meaning” must be conceived 
as the formal-existential framework of the disclosedness which belongs to 
understanding. Meaning is an existentiale of Dasein, not 'a property 
attaching to entities, lying ‘behind’ them, or floating somewhere as an 
‘intermediate domain’. Dasein only ‘has’ meaning, so far as the 
disclosedness of Being-in-the-world can be ‘filled in’ by the entities dis- 
coverable in that disclosedness.* Hence only Dasein can be meaningful [sirn- 
voll] or meaningless [sinnlos]. That is to say, its own Being and the entities 
disclosed with its Being can be appropriated in understanding, or can 
remain relegated to non-understanding. 

This Interpretation of the concept of ‘meaning’ is one which is onto- 
logico-existential in principle; if we adhere to it, then all entities whose 
kind of Being is of a character other than Dasein’s must be conceived as 
unmeaning [unsinniges|, essentially devoid of any meaning at all. Here 
‘unmeaning’ does not signify that we are saying anything about the 
value of such entities, but it gives expression to an ontological 
characteristic. And only that which is unmeaning can be absurd [widersinnig]. 
The present-at-hand, as Dasein encounters it, can, as it were, assault 
Dasein’s Being; natural events, for instance, can break in upon us and 
destroy us. 

And if we are inquiring about the meaning of Being, our investigation 
does not then become a ‘“‘deep”’ one [tiefsinnig], nor does it puzzle out 
what stands behind Being. It asks about Being itself in so far as Being 
enters into the intelligibility of Dasein. The meaning of Being can never be 


1 ‘Sinn ist das durch Vorhabe, Vorsicht und Vorgiff strukturierte Woraufhin des Entwurfs, aus 
dem her etwas als etwas verstandlich wird.’ (Notice that our usual translation of ‘verstandlich, 
and ‘Verstandlichkeit’ as ‘intelligible’ and ‘intelligibility’, fails to show the connection of 
the words with ‘Verstandnis’, etc. This connection could have been brought out 


effectively by writing ‘understandable,’ ‘understandability’, etc., but only at the cost of 


awkwardness.) 


2 ‘Sinn “hat” nur das Dasein, sofern die Erschlossenheit des In-der-Welt-seins durch 
das in ihr entdeckbare Seiende “erfüllbar” ist.” The point of this puzzling and ambiguous 
sentence may become somewhat clearer if the reader recalls that here as elsewhere (see 
H. 75 above) the verb ‘erschliessen’ (‘disclose’) is used in the sense of ‘opening something 
up’ so that its contents can be ‘discovered’. What thus gets ‘opened up’ will then be ‘filled 
in’ as more and more of its contents get discovered. 


G 


152 


153 


` 


I.5 
contrasted with entities, or with Being as the ‘ground’ which gives 
entities support; for a ‘ground’ becomes accessible only as meaning, even 
if it is itself the abyss of meaninglessness.! 

As the disclosedness of the “there”, undersianding always pertains to 


194 Being and Time 


‚the whole of Being-in-the-world. In every understanding of the world, 


existence is understood with it, and vice versa. All interpretation, moreover, 
operates in the fore-structure, which we have already characterized. Any 
interpretation which is to contribute understanding, must already have 
understood what is to be interpreted. This is a fact that has always been 
remarked, even if only in the area of derivative ways of understanding and 
interpretation, such as philological Interpretation. The latter belongs 
within the range of scientific knowledge. Such knowledge demands the 
rigour of a demonstration to provide grounds for it. In a scientific proof, 
we may not presuppose what it is our task to provide grounds for. But if 
interpretation must in any case already operate in that which is under- 
stood, and if it must draw its nurture from this, how is it to bring any 
scientific results to maturity without moving in a circle, especially ıf, 
moreover, the understanding which is presupposed still operates within 
our common information about man and the world? Yet according to 
the most elementary rules of logic, this circle is a circulus vitiosus. If that be 
so, however, the business of historiological interpretation is excluded 
a priori from the domain of rigorous knowledge. In so far as the Fact of 
this circle in understanding is not eliminated, historiology must then be 
resigned to less rigorous possibilities of knowing. Historiology is permitted 
to compensate for this defect to some extent through the ‘spirityal sig- 
nification’ of its ‘objects’. But even in the opinion of the historian himself, 
it would admittedly be more ideal if the circle could be avoided and if 
there remained the hope of creating some time a historiology which would 
be as independent of the standpoint of the observer as our knowledge of 
Nature is supposed to be. 

But if we see this circle as a vicious one and look out for ways of avoiding it, even if 
we just ‘sense’ it as an inevitable imperfection, then the act of understanding 
has been misunderstood from the ground up. The assimilation of understanding 
and interpretation to a definite ideal of knowledge is not the issue here. 
Such an ideal is itself only a subspecies of understanding—a subspecies 
which has strayed into the legitimate task of grasping the present-at- 
hand in its essential unintelligibility [Unverstandlichkeit]. If the basic 


‘conditions which make interpretation possible are to be fulfilled, this must 


2 ‘Der Sinn von Sein kann nie in Gegensatz gebracht werden zum Seienden oder zum 
Sein als tragenden “Grund” des Seienden, weil “Grund” nur als Sinn zugänglich wird, 
und sei er selbst der Abgrund der Sinnlosigkeit.’ Notice the etymological kinship between 
‘Grund’ (‘ground’) and ‘Abgrund’ (‘abyss’). 


I.5 Being and Time 195 


rather be done by not failing to recognize beforehand the essential 
conditions under which it can be performed. What is decisive is not to get 
out of the circle but to come into it in the right wav. This circle of under- 
standing is not an orbit in which any random kind of knowledge may 
move; it is the expression of the existential fore-structure of Dasein itself. 
It is not to be reduced to the level of a vicious circle, or even of a circle 
which is merely tolerated. In the circle is hidden a positive possibility of 
the most primordial kind of knowing. To be sure, we genuinely take hold 
of this possibility only when, in our interpretation, we have understood 
that our first, last, and constant task is never to allow our fore-having, 
fore-sight, and fore-conception to be presented to us by fancies and 
popular conceptions, but rather to make the scientific theme secure by 
working out these fore-structures in terms of the things themselves. 
Because understanding, in accordance with its existential meaning, 1s 
Dasein’s own potentiality-for-Being, the ontological presuppositions of 
historiological knowledge transcend in principle the idea of rigour held 
in the most exact sciences. Mathematics is not more rigorous than his- 
toriology, but only narrower, because the existential foundations relevant 
for it lie within a narrower range. 

The ‘circle’ in understanding belongs to the structure of meaning, and 
the latter phenomenon is rooted in the existential constitution of Dasein— 
that is, in the understanding which interprets. An entity for which, as 
Being-in-the-world, its Being is itself an issue, has, ontologically, a 


circular structure. If, however, we note that ‘circularity’ belongs onte- 


logically to a kind of Being which is present-at-hand (namely, to subsist- 
ence [Bestand]), we must altogether avoid using this phenomenon to 
characterize anything like Dasein ontologically. 


€ 33. Assertion as a Derivative Mode of Interpretation 


All interpretation is grounded on understanding. That which has been 
articulated! as such in interpretation and sketched out beforehand in the 
understanding in general as something articulable, is the meaning. In so 
far as assertion (‘judgment’)? is grounded on understanding and presents 
us with a derivative form in which an interpretation has been carried out, 
it too ‘has’ a meaning. Yet this meaning cannot be defined as something 
which occurs ‘in’ [‘‘an’’] a judgment along with the judging itself. In our 


1 ‘Gegliederte’. The verbs ‘artikulieren’ and ‘gliedern’ can both be translated by 
‘articulate’ in English; even in German they are nearly synonymous, but in the former the 
emphasis is presumably on the ‘joints’ at which something gets divided, while in the latter 
the emphasis is presumably on the ‘parts’ or ‘members’. We have distinguished between 
them by translating ‘artikulieren’ by ‘Articulate’ (with a capital ‘A’}, and ‘gliedern’ by 
‘articulate’ (with a lower-case initial). 

2‘... die Aussage (das “Urteil’”) ...’ 


154 


155 


196 Being and Time I.5 


present context, we shall give an explicit analysis of assertion, and this 
analysis will serve several purposes. 

For one thing, it can be demonstrated, by considering assertion, in 
what ways the structure of the ‘as’, which is constitutive for understanding 
and interpretation, can be modified. When this has been done, both 
understanding and interpretation will be brought more sharply into view. 
For another thing, the analysis of assertion has a special position in the 
problematic of fundamental ontology, because in the decisive period 
when ancient ontology was beginning, the Adyos functioned as the only 
clue for obtaining access to that which authentically is [zum eigentlich 
Seienden], and for defining the Being of such entities. Finally assertion 
has been accepted from ancient times as the primary and authentic ‘locus’ 
of truth. The phenomenon of truth is so thoroughly coupled with the 
problem of Being that our investigation, as it proceeds further, will 
necessarily come up against the problem of truth; and it already lies 
within the dimensions of that problem, though not explicitly. The 
analysis of assertion will at the same time prepare the way for this latter 
problematic. 

In what follows, we give three significations to the term “assertion””. 
These are drawn from the phenomenon which is thus designated, they 
are connected among themselves, and in their unity they encompass the 
full structure of assertion. 

1. The primary signification of ‘‘assertion”’ is “pointing out” | Aufzeigen]. 
In this we adhere to the primordial meaning of Adyos as ardbavors—letting 
an entity be seen from itself. In the assertion “The hammer is too heavy’, 
what is discovered for sight is not a ‘meaning’, but an entity in the way 
that it is ready-to-hand. Even if this entity is not close enough to be 
grasped and ‘seen’, the pointing-out has in view the entity itself and not, 
let us say, a mere “representation” [Vorstellung] of it—neither some- 
thing ‘merely represented’ nor the psychical condition in which the person 
who makes the assertion “represents” it. 

2. “Assertion” means no less than ‘‘predication”. We ‘assert’ a ‘predicate’ 
of a ‘subject’, and the ‘subject’ is given a dejinite character [bestimmt] by 
the ‘predicate’. In this signification of “assertion”, that which is put 
forward in the assertion [Das Ausgesagte] is not the predicate, but ‘the 
hammer itself’. On the other hand, that which does the asserting [Das 
Aussagende] (in other words, that which gives something a definite 
character) lies in the ‘too heavy’. That which is put forward in the 
assertion in the second signification of “‘assertion’’ (that which is given a 
definite character, as such) has undergone a narrowing of content as 
compared with what is put forward in the assertion in the first signification 


1.5 Being and Time 197 


of this term. Every predication is what it is, only as a pointing-out. The 
second signification of “assertion” has its foundation in the first. Within 
this pointing-out, the elements which are Articulated in predication—the 
subject and predicate—arise. It is not by giving something a definite 
character that we first discover that which shows itself—the hammer—as 
such; but when we give it such a character, our seeing gets restricted to it 
in the first instance, so that by this explicit restriction! of our view, that 
which is already manifest may be made explicitly manifest in its definite 
character. In giving something a definite character, we must, in the first 
instance, take a step back when confronted with that which is already 
manifest—the hammer that is too heavy. In ‘setting down the subject’, we 
dim entities down to focus in ‘that hammer there’, so that by thus dimming 
them down we may let that which is manifest be seen ın its own definite 
character as a character that can be determined.* Setting down the subject, 
setting down the predicate, and setting down the two together, are 
thoroughly ‘apophantical’ in the strict sense of the word. 

3. ‘Assertion’ means “communication” [Mitteilung], speaking forth 
[Heraussage]. As communication, it is directly related to “‘assertion’’ in 
the first and second significations. It is letting someone see with us what 
we have pointed out by way of giving it a definite character. Letting 
someone see with us shares with [teilt . . . mit] the Other that entity 
which has been pointed out in its definite character. That which is 
‘shared’ is our Being towards what has been pointed out—a Being in which 
we see it in common, One must keep in mind that this Being-towards is 
Being-in-the-world, and that from out of this very world what has been 
pointed out gets encountered. Any assertion, as a communication under- 
stood in this existential manner, must have been expressed.* As something 
communicated, that which has been put forward in the äßsertion is 
something that Others can ‘share’ with the person making the assertion, 
even though the entity which he has pointed out and to which he has 
given a definite character is not close enough for them to grasp and see it. 
That which is put forward in the assertion is something which can be 
passed along in ‘further retelling’. There is a widening of the range of that 
mutual sharing which sees. But at the same time, what has been pointed 
out may become veiled again in this further retelling, although even the 
kind of knowing which arises in such hearsay (whether knowledge that 


1 ‘Einschränkung’, The older editions have ‘Entschrankung’. 

2‘... die “Subjektsetzung’’ blendet das Seiende ab auf “‘der Hammer da”, um durch 
den Vollzug der Entblendung das Offenbare in seiner bestimmbaren Bestimmtheit 
sehen zu lassen.’ 


3 ‘Zur Aussage als der so existenzial verstandenen Mit-teilung gehört die Ausges- 
prochenheit.’ 


198 Being and Time 5 


something is the case [Wissen] or merely an acquaintance with something 
[Kennen]) always has the entity itself in view and does not ‘give assent’ 
to some ‘valid meaning’ which has been passed around. Even hearsay is a 
Being-in-the-world, and a Being towards what is heard. 

_ There is prevalent today a theory of ‘judgment’ which is oriented to the 
phenomenon of ‘validity’.1 We shall not give an extensive discussion of it 
here. It will be sufficient to allude to the very questionable character of 
this phenomenon of ‘validity’, though since the time of Lotze people have 
been fond of passing this off as a ‘primal phenomenon’ which cannot 
be traced back any further. The fact that it can play this role is due only 
to its ontologically unclarified character. The ‘problematic’ which has 
established itself round this idolized word is no less opaque. In the first 
place, validity is viewed as the ‘form’ of actuality which goes with the content 
of the judgment, in so far as that content remains unchanged as opposed 
to the changeable ‘psychical’ process of judgment. Considering how the 
status of the question of Being in general has been characterized in the 
introduction to this treatise, we would scarcely venture to expect that 
‘validity’ as ‘ideal Being’ is distinguished by special ontological clarity. In 
the second place, “‘validity” means at the same time the validity of the 
meaning of the judgment, which is valid of the ‘Object’ it has in view; and 
thus it attains the signification of an ‘Objectively valid character’ and of 
Objectivity in general. In the third place, the meaning which is thus 
‘valid’ of an entity, and which is valid ‘timelessly’ in itself, is said to be 
‘valid’ also in the sense of being valid for everyone who judges rationally. 
“Validity” now means a bindingness, or ‘universally valid’ character.? 


‘Even if one were to advocate a ‘critical’ epistemological theory, according 


to which the subject does not ‘really’ ‘come out’ to the Object, then this 
valid character, as the validity of an Object (Objectivity), is grounded 
upon that stock of true (!) meaning which is itself valid. The three signi- 
fications of ‘being valid’ which we have set forth—the way of Being of the 
ideal, Objectivity, and bindingness—not only are opaque in themselves 
but constantly get confused with one another. Methodological fore-sight 


1 Heidegger uses three words which might conveniently be translated as ‘validity’: 
‘Geltung’ (our 'validity’), ‘Gültigkeit’ (our ‘valid character’), and ‘Gelten’ (our ‘being 
valid’, etc.). The reader who has studied logic in English and who accordingly thinks of 
‘validity’ as merely a property of arguments in which the premisses imply the conclusion, 
must remember that in German the verb ‘gelten’ and its eva are used much more 
broadly, so as to apply to almost anything that is commonly (or even privately) accepted, 
so that one can speak of the ‘validity’ of legal tender, the ‘validity’ of a ticket for so many 
weeks or months, the ‘validity’ of that which ‘holds’ for me or for you, the ‘validity’ of 
anything that is the case. While Heidegger’s discussion does not cover as many of these 
meanings as will be listed in any good German dietionary, he goes well beyond the 
narrower usage of the English-speaking logician. Of course, we shall often translate ‘gelten’ 
in other ways. 

2‘... Verbindlichkeit, “Aligemeingiltigkeit’’.’ 


I.5 Being and Time 199 
demands that we do not choose such unstable concepts as a clue to Inter- 
pretation. We make no advance restriction upon the concept of “‘mean- 
ing” which would confine it to signifying the ‘content of judgment’, but 
we understand it as the existential phenomenon already characterized, in 
which the forma! framework of what can bedisclosed in understanding and 
Articulated :n interpretation becomes visible. 

If we brin, + gether the three significations of ‘assertion’ which we have 
analysed, and yet a unitary view of the full phenomenon, then we may 
define “assertion’’ as “‘a poinling-out which gives something a definite character 
and which communicates”. It remains to ask with what justification we have 
taken assertion as a mode of interpretation at all. If it is something of 
this sort, then the essential structures of interpretation must recur in it. 
The pointing-out which assertion does is performed on the basis of what 
has already been disclosed in understanding or discovered circumspec- 
tively. Assertion is not a free-floating kind of behaviour which, in its own 
right, might be capable of disclosing entities in general in a primary way: 
on the contrary it always maintains itself on the basis of Being-in-the- 
world. What we have shown earlier!* in relation to knowing the world, 
holds just as well as assertion. Any assertion requires a fore-having of 
whatever has bedk disclosed ; and this is what it points out by way of 
giving sométhing a definite character. Furthermore, in any approach 
when one. gives something a definite character, one is already taking a 
look directionally at-what is to be put forward in the assertion. When an 
entity which has been presented is given a definite character, tht function 
of giving it such a character is taken over by that with regard tr which we 
set our sight; towards the entity.! Thus any assertion requires a fore-sight; 
in this the predicate which we are to assign [zuzuweisende] and make 
stand out, gets loosened, so to speak, from its unexpressed inclusion in the 
entity itself. To any assertion as a communication which gives something 
a definite character there belongs, moreover, an Articulation of what is 
pointed out, and this Articulation is in accordance with significations. 
Such an assertion will operate with a definite way of conceiving: ‘The 
hammer is heavy”, ‘“Heaviness belongs to the hammer”, “The hammer 
has the property of heaviness”. When an assertion is made, some fore- 
conception is always implied; but it remains for the most part incon- 
spicuous, because the language already hides in itself a developed way 
- of conceiving. Like any interpretation whatever, assertion necessarjly has 
a fore-having, a fore-sight, and a fore-conception as its existential founda- 
tions. 


1 “Voraufhin das vorgegebene Seiende anvisiert wird, das übernimmt im Bestimmungs- 
vollzug die Funktion des Bestimmenden.’ 


157 


200 Being and Time 1.5 


But to what extent does it become a dertvative mode of interpretation ? 
What has been modified in it? We can point out the modification if we 
stick to certain limiting cases of assertion which function in logic as normal 
cases and as examples of the ‘simplest’ assertion-phenomena. Prior to all 
analysis, logic has already understood ‘logically’ what it takes as a theme 
under the heading of the ‘‘categorical statement”’—for instance, ‘The 
hammer is heavy’. The unexplained presupposition is that the ‘meaning’ 
of this sentence is to be taken as: “This Thing—a hammer—has the 
property of heaviness”. In concernful circumspection there are no such 
assertions ‘at first’. But such circumspection has of course its specific ways 
of interpreting, and these, as compared with the ‘theoretical judgment’ 
just mentioned, may take some such form as ‘The hammer is too heavy’, 
or rather just “Too heavy!’, ‘Hand me the other hammer!’ Interpretation 
is carried out primordially not in a theoretical statement but in an action 
of circumspective concern—laying aside the unsuitable tool, or exchanging 
it, ‘without wasting words’. From the fact that words are absent, it may 
not be concluded that interpretation is absent. On the other hand, 
the kind of interpretation which is circumspectively expressed is not 
necessarily already an assertior: in the sense we have defined. By what 
extstential-ontological modifications «oes assertion arıse from circumspective inter- 
pretation? 

The entity which is held in our fore-having—for instance, the hammer 
—is proximally ready-to-hand as equipment. If this entity becomes the 
‘object’ of an assertion, then as soon as we begin this assertion, there is 
already a change-over in the fore-having. Something ready-to-hand with 
which we have to do or perform something, turns into something ‘about 
which’ the assertion that points it out is made. Our fore-sight is aimed at 
something present-at-hand in what is ready-to-hand. Both éy and for this 
way of looking at it [Hin-sicht], the ready-to-hand becomes veiled as 
ready-to-hand. Within this discovering of presence-at-hand, which is at 
the same time a covering-up of readiness-to-hand, something present-at- 
hand which we encounter is given a definite character in its Being-present- 
at-hand-in-such-and-such-a-manner. Only now are we given any access 
to properties or the like. When an assertion has given a definite character 
to something present-at-hand, it says something about it as a “what”; 
and this “what” is drawn from that which is present-at-hand as such. The 
as-structure of interpretation has undergone a modification, In its func- 
tion of appropriating what is understood, the ‘as’ no longer reaches out 
into a totality of involvements. As regards its possibilities for Articulating 
reference-relations, it has been cut off from that significance which, as 
such, constitutes environmentality. The ‘as’ gets pushed back into the 


I.5 Being and Time 201 


uniform plane of that which is merely present-at-hand. It dwindles to 
the structure of just letting one see what is present-at-hand, and letting one 
see it in a definite way. This levelling of the primordial ‘as’ of circum- 
spective interpretation to the “as” with which presence-at-hand is given 


a definite character is the specialty of assertion. Only so does it obtain. 


the possibility of exhibiting something in such a way that we just 
look at it. 

Thus assertion cannot disown its ontological origin from an interpreta- 
tion which understands. The primordial ‘as’ oï an interpretation {epunveia) 
which understands circumspectively we cali the ‘‘existential-hermeneutical 
‘as’ ” an distinction from the “apophanticel ‘as ’ of the assertion. 

Between the kind of interpretation which j is stul wholl, wrapped up in 
concernful understanding and the extreme opposite case of a theoretical 
assertion about something present-at-hand, tic: ars. many intermediate 
gradations: as sertions < ‘pout the Laie ib tie environment, accounts 

of the ready-te pant. .cportson the Situation’ cre re cording anc fixing of 
ie ‘facts of clic caus the description of as stu cw ie airs, the rarration 
of something v i-i fas oetallen. We canne: were pars these “sentenccs’ to 
theoretical state: s without essentially re rvertipg their meau'ug. Like 
the theoreueal stai cents themselves, they Lave their source’ in circum- 
spective interpretaticn. 

With the progress of knowledge about the structure of the Adyos, it 
was inevitable that this phenomenon of the apoprantıral ‘as’ shold come 
inte view in sonte form: or other. Whe manne: in which it was proximally 
seen was not acönlental, and did not fail to work itself out in the subsequent 
history of logic. j 

When corsidered philosophically, the Adyas itscif is an entity, and, 
according to the orientation of ancient ontolozy, it *s something present- 
at-hand. Words ive proximally present-ät-hand: thai is tu say, we come 
across therin just as we come across Things; ana this holds for any sequence 
of words, as that in which tne Adyos expresses itself. In this first search for 
the structure of tie Aoyos as thus present-at-hand, what was found was 
the Being-present- at hand-together of several words. What establishes the 
unity of this “together” ? As Plato knew, this unity lies in the fact that the 
Adyos is always Adyvos turds. In the Adyos an entity is manifest, and with 


a view to this entitv, the words are put together in onz verbal whole. 


Aristotle saw this more radically: every Acyos is both vuvdeoıs and 
duaipeots, NO: just the one (call it ‘affirmative judgment’) or the other 
(call it ‘negative judgment’). Rather, every assertion, whether it affirms 
or denies, whether it is true or false, is auvdeoıs and dtatpeots eyuiprim- 
ordially. To exhibit anything is to take it together and take it apart. It is 


in 


eO 


160 


202 Being and Time I. 5 


true, of course, that Aristotle did not pursue the analytical question as far 
as the problem of which phenomenon within the structure of the Adyos is; 
the one that permits and indeed obliges us to characterize every statement . 
as synthesis’and diaeresis. z 

Aleng witt the formal tructures of ‘binding’ and ‘separating’-—or, 
more reise. along rs to: unity of these—w saould meet the% n- 


meni wa. Something ax -coethins’, and we houla weet this.. ~ 
phen toa inaccor. ace th this strecture,  vethiny is under»: «.:! 
with: oJ co cemer gioi i taken together w...: it, yet in such a way 
that tiis cm tatic: vnuch understands will at the same ume take ¿pact 
what! :ix .. taken together, and will do so by Articulating it tnler{i2/u- 
tively, the ©. nomer:-n of the ‘as’ remains covered un. and, abow> 2i, 
ifits enia’ sources :n the i-:rmeneutical ‘as’ is veiled, then Aristoile's 


pher .enoin::cal app-oach to the analysis of the Adyos collapses to a 
super al ‘theury of judgment’, in which judgment becomes the binding 
or ser. onting uf represeritatic:s and concepts. 

Bir ing and separating may be formalized sti’! further to a ‘relating’. 
The judgmer.: gets dissolved logistically into a sysiem in which things are 
‘co-ordinated’ with one another; it becomes the object of a ‘calculus’; 
but it does not become a theme for ontological Interpretation. The pos- 
sibility and impossibility of getting an analytical understanding of ovvBeoıs 
and Ssaipeots—of the ‘relation’ in judgment generally—is tightly linked 
up with whatever the current status of the ontological problematic and its 


_ principles may be. 


How far this problematic has worked its way into the Interpretation of 
the Adyos, and how far on the cther hand the concept of ‘judgment’ has 
(by a remarkable counter-thrust) worked its way into the ontological 
problematic, is shown by the phenomenon of the copula. When we consider 
this ‘bond’, it becomes clear that proximally the synthesis-structure is 
regarded as self-evident, and that it has also retained the function of 
serving as a standard for Interpretation. But if the formal characteristics 
of ‘relating’ and ‘binding’ can contribute nothing phenomenally towards 
the structural analysis of the Adyos as subject-matter, then in the long run 
the phenomenon to which we allude by the term “‘copula” has nothing 
to do with a bond or binding. The Interpretation of the ‘is’, whether it be 
expressed in its own right in the language or indicated in the verbal 
ending, leads us therefore into the context of problems belonging to the 
existential analytic, if assertion and the understanding of Being are 
existential possibilities for the Being of Dasein itself. When we come to 
work out the question of Being (cf. Part I, Division 3),! we shall thus 


1 This Division has never appeared. 


I.5 Being and Time 203 
encounter again this peculiar phenomenon of Being which we meet 
within the Adyos. 

By demonstrating that assertion is derived from interpretation and 
understanding, we have made it plain that the ‘logic’ of the Adyos is 
“ rooted in the existential analytic of Dasein; and provisionally this has 
been sufficient. At the same time, by knowing that the Aöyos has been 
Interpreted in a way which is ontologically inadequate, we have gained a 
sharper insight into the fact that the methodological basis on which ancient 
ontology arose was not a primordial one. The Adyos gets experienced as 
something present-at-hand and Interpreted as such, while at the same 
time the entities which it points out have the meaning of presence-at- 
hand. This meaning of Being is left undifferentiated and uncontrasted 
with other possibilities of Being, so that Being in the sense of a formal 
Being-something becomes fused with it simuitaneously, and we are unable 
even to obtain a clear-cut division betwcen these two realms. 


€ 34. Being-there and Discourse. Language 


The fundamental extstenitalta which constitute the Being of the “there”, 
the disclosedness of Being-in-the-world, are states-of-mind and under- 
standing. In understanding, there lurks the possibility of interpretation— 
that is, of appropriating what is understood. In so far as a state-of-mind 
is equiprimordial with an act of understanding, it maintains itself in a 
certain understanding. Thus there corresponds to it a certain capacity 
for getting interpreted. We have seen that assertion is derived from 
interpretation, and is an extreme case of it. In clarifying the third significa- 
tion of assertion as communication (speaking forth), we were led to the 
concepts of “saying” and “speaking”, to which we had purposely given 
no attention up to that point. The fact that language now becomes our 
theme for the first time will indicate that this phenomenon has its roots in 
the existential constitution of Dasein’s disclosedness. The existential- 
ontological foundation of language ws discourse or talk. This phenomenon is 
one of which we have been making constant use already in our foregoing 
Interpretation of state-of-mind, understanding, interpretation, and asser- 
tion; but we have, as it were, kept it suppressed in our thematic analysis. 

Discourse is extstentially equeprimordial with state-nf-mind and understanding. 
The intelligibility of something has always been articulated, even before 
there is any appropriative interpretation of it. Discourse is the Articulation 

1 ‘Rede’. As we have pointed out earlier (see our note 3, p. 47, H. 25 above), we have 


translated this word cither as ‘cliscourse’ or ‘talk’, as the context seems to demand, some-’ 


times compromising with the hendiadys ‘discourse or talk’. But in some contexts ‘dis- 
course’ is too formal while ‘talk’ is too colloquial; the reader must remember that there is 
no good English equivalent for ‘Rede’, For a previous discussion see Section 7 B above 


(H. 32-34). 


161 


162 


204 Being and Time I.5 
of intelligibility. Therefore it underlies both interpretation and asser- 
tion. That which can be Articulated in interpretation, and thus even 
more primordially in discourse, is what we have called “meaning”. That 
which gets articulated as such in discursive Articulation, we call the 
“totality-of-significations” [Bedeutungsganze]. This can be dissolved or 
broken up into significations. Significations, as what has been Articulated 
from that which can be Articulated, always carry meaning [. .. sind... 
sinnhaft]. If discourse, as the Articulation of the intelligibility of the 
“there”, is a primordial existentiale of disclosedness, and if disclosedness is 
primarily constituted by Being-in-the-wor!d, then discourse too must have 
essentially a kind of Being which is specifically worldly. The intelligibility 
of Being-in-the-world—an intelligibility which goes with a state-of-riind 
—expresses itself as discourse. The totality-of-significations of intelligibility 
is put into words. To significations, words accrue. But word-Things do not 
get supplied with significations. 

The way in which discourse gets expressed is language.! Language is a 
totality of words—a totality in which discourse has a ‘worldly’ Being of 
its own; and as an entity within-the-world; this totality thus becomes 
something which we may come across as ready-to-hand. Language can 
be broken up into word-Things which are present-at-hand. Discourse is 
existentially language, because that entity whose disclosedness it Articu- 
lates according to significations, has, as its kind of Being, Being-in-the- 
world—a Being which has been thrown and submitted to the ‘world’. 

As an existential state in which Dasein is disclosed, discourse is con- 
stitutive for Dasein’s existence. Hearing and keeping silent [Schweigen] are 
possibilities belonging to discursive speech. In these phenomena the con- 
stitutive function of discourse for the existentiality of existence becomes 
entirely plain for the first time. But in the first instance the issue is one of 
working out the structure of discourse as such. 

Discoursing or talking is the way in which we articulate ‘significantly’ 
the intelligibility of Being-in-the-world. Being-with belongs to Being- 
in-the-world, which in every case maintains itself in some definite way 
of concernful Being-with-one-another. Such Being-with-one-another is 
discursive as assenting or refusing, as demanding or warning, as pro- 
nouncing, consulting, or interceding, as ‘making assertions’, and as 
talking in the way of ‘giving a talk’.? Talking is talk about something. 
That which the discourse is about [das Worüber der Rede] does not neces- 
sarily or even for the most part serve as the theme for an assertion in 


1 ‘Die Hinausgesprochenhcit der Rede ist die Sprache.’ 

2 ‘Dieses ist redend als zu- und absagen, auffordern, warnen, als Aussprache, Rück- 
sprache, Fürsprache, ferner als “Aussagen machen’ und als reden in der Weise des 
“Redenhaltens’'.’ 


I. 5 Being and Time 205 
which one gives something a definite character. Even a command is given 
about something; a wish is about something. And so is intercession. What 
the discourse is about is a structural item that it necessarily possesses; 
for discourse helps to constitute the disclosedness of Being-in-the-world, 
and in its own structure it is modelled upon this basic state of Dasein. 
What is talked about [das Beredete] in talk is always ‘talked to’ [‘‘an- 
geredet”’] in a definite regard and within certain limits.: In any talk or 
discourse, there is something said-in-the-talk as such [ein Geredetes as 
solches|—something said as such [das .. . Gesagte als solches] whenever 
one wishes, asks, or expresses oneself about something. In this ‘‘something 
said’, discourse cominunicates, 

As we have already indicated in our analysis of assertion,! the phenome- 
non of communtcation must be understood in a sense which is ontologically 
broad. ‘Communication’ in which one makes assertions—giving informa- 
tion, for instance—is a special case of that communication which is 
grasped in principle existentially. In this more general kind of com- 
munication, the Articulation of Being with one another understandingly 
is constituted. Through it a co-state-of-mind [Mitbefindlichkeit] gets 
‘shared’, and so does the understanding of Being-with. Communication 
is never anything like a conveying of experiences, such as opinions or 
wishes, from the interior of one subject into the interior of another. 
Dasein-with is already essentially manifest in a co-state-of-mind and a 
co-understanding. In discourse Being-with becomes ‘explicitly’ shared; 
that is to say, it is already, but it is unshared as something that has not 
been taken hold of and appropriated.” | 

Whenever something is communicated in what is said-in-the-talk, all 
talk about anything has at the same time the character of expressing itself 
[Sichaussprechers). In talking, Dasein expresses itself [spricht sich . . . aus] 
not because it has, in the first *ustance, been encapsulated as something 
‘internal’ over against somethin ; outside, but because as Be:..g-in-the- 
world it is already ‘outside’ when it understands “hat is expressed is 
precisely this Being-outside—th-t is te say. the way on which en: currently 
has a state-of-mind (mood), which we hove shows ic pertain +o the full 

isclosedness of Being-in. Being-in and is stase-ol-ı cind arc mde known 
in discourse and indicated in language by intoroti. medu ation, the 
tempo of talk, ‘the way of speaking’. in ‘noctical sty: curse, che com- 
munication of the existential possibilities « : one’s state-ofsan.d can be- 
come an aim in itself, and this amounts to a disclosing of -istesiue, 


1 Reading ‘.. . bei der Analyse der Aussage . . .’ with the older ».:ittons. The words 
‘der Aussage’ have been omitted in the newer editions. 

2 ‘Das Mitsein wird in der Rede “ausdrücklich” yetrlt, das heisst es ist schon, nur 
ungeteilt als nicht ergriffienes und zugesignetes.’ 


206 Being and Time T.5 
In discourse the intelligibility of Being-in-the-world (^an intelligibility 
which goes with a state-of-mind) is articulated according to significations; 
and discourse is this articulation. The items constitutive for discourse 
are: what the discourse is about (what is talked about); what is said-in- 
the-talk, as such; the communication; and the making-known. These are 
not properties which can just be raked up empirically from language. 
They are existential characteristics rooted in the state of Dasein’s Being, 
163 and itis they that first make anything like language ontologically possible. 
In the factical linguistic form of any definite case of discourse, some of 
these items may be lacking, or may remain unnoticed. The fact that they 
often do not receive ‘verbal’ expression, is merely an index of some defmite 
kind of discourse which, in so far as it is discourse, must in every case lie 
within the totality of the structures we have mentioned. 

Attempts to grasp the ‘essence of language’ have always taken their 
orientation from one or another of these items: end the clues to their 
conceptions of language have been the ideas of ‘expression’, of ‘symbolic 
fonn’, of communication as ‘assertion’,! of the ‘making-known’ of experi- 

-ences, of the ‘patterning’ of life. Even if one were to put these various 
fragmentary definitions together in syncretistic fashion, nothing would be 
achicved in the way of a fully adequate definiticn of “language”. We 
would sail have to do what is Cecisive here—to work. out in advance the 
ontos nie =-exis.cntal whol ofrne structure of discourse on the basis of the 


arais F Dasein. 

Woo. mako clear the orneciion of discourse with understanding and 
wc ‚ considers, an existential possibility which belongs te 
ta os occa tearing. we nave not heard ‘arichr it is not by accident 
thal c have not ‘urderstcod’, Hearing is constitutive for discourse. 
Awl laguistiç ulterance is based on discourse, so is acoustic 
pe op hearing. Listening to... is Dascin’s existential way of 
Bein, oso ©, Being-with fo: Others. , Indeed, hearing constitutes the 
pi: ne sanhente vay in which: ‘Dasein is open for its ownmost 
pot iy jor-Being—as ir. hearing the voice of the friend whom every 
EI aries with it, Dasein hears, ‚because it understands. As a Being- 
> ayerld with Others, a Being which understands, Dasein is ‘in thrall’ 


wi “asem-with and to itself; and in:this thraldom it “belongs” to these.? 
":»-with develops in listening to one another [Aufeinander-hören],; 


+h can be done in several possible ways: following,’ going along with, 


. der Mitteilung ak ‘‘Aussage’’.. .' The quotation marks around ‘Aussage’ appear 
G vin n the newer edition. ©: 

“Als verstehendes Ín- cer-Welt-sein mit ‘den Anderen tst es dem Mitdasein und ihm 
st !bst “'hörig”’ und in dieser Hörigkeit zugehörig.’ In this sentence Heidegger uses some 
es of ‘hören’ (‘hearing’) whose interrelations disappear in our version. 

des Folgens. . .’ In the earlier cditions there are quotation marks around ‘Folgens’. 


1.5 Being and Time 207 


and the privative modes of not-hearing, resisting, defying, and turning 
away. 

It is on the basis of this potentiality for hearing, which is existentially 
primary, that anything like hearkening [Horchen] becomes possible. Hear- 
kening is phenomenally still more primordial than what is defined ‘in the 
first instance’ as “hearing” in psychology—the sensing of tones and the 
perception of sounds. Hearkening too has the kind of Being of the hearing 
which understands. What we ‘first’ hear is never noises or complexes of 
sounds, but the creaking waggon, the motor-cycle. We hear the column 
on the march, the.north wind, the woodpecker tapping, the fire crackling. 

It requires a very artificial and complicated frame of mind to ‘heai’ a 
‘pure noise’. The fact that motor-cycles and waggons are what we 
proximally hear is the phenomenal evidence that in every case Dasein, 
as Being-in-the-world, already dwells alongside what is ready-to-hand 
within-the-world; it certainly does not dwell proximally alongside 
‘sensations’; nor would it first have to give shape to the swirl of sensations 
to provide the springboard from which the subject leaps off and finally 
arrives at a ‘world’. Dasein, as essentially understanding, is proximally 
alungside what is understood. 

Likewise, when we are explicitly hearing the discourse of another, we 
proximally understand what is said, or—to put it more exactly—we are 
already with him, in advance, alongside the entity which the discourse is 
about. On the other hand, what we proximally hear is not what is ex- 
pressed in the utterance. Even in cases where the speech is indistinct or in 
a foreign language, what we proximally hear is unintelligible words, and 
not a multiplicity of tone-data.! 

Admittedly, wien what the discourse is about is heard ‘naturally’, we 
can at the same time hear the ‘diction’, the way in which it is said [die 
Weise des Gesagtseins], but only if there is some co-understanding before- 
hand of what is said-in-the-talk; for only so is there a possibility of 
estimating whether the way in which it is said is appropriate to what the 
discourse is about thematically. 

In the same way, any answering counter-discourse arises proximally and 
directly from understanding what the discourse is about, which is already 
‘shared’ in Being-with. . 

Only where talking and hearing are existentially possible, can anyone 
hearken. The person who ‘cannot hear’ and ‘must feel’? may perhaps be 
one who is able to hearken very well, and precisely because of this. i ..3t 


4 Here we follow the reading of the newer editions: ‘. . . nicht eine Mannigfai:.;;:. =. 
von Tondaten:’ The older editions have ‘reine’ instead of ‘eine’. 

2 The author is here alluding to the German proverb, ‘Wer nicht’ hören kann. ruus 
fühlen.’ (I.e. he who cannot heed, must suffer.) 


208 Being and Time L5 


hearing something “all around” [Das Nur-herum-hören] is a privation 
of the ..earing which understands. Both talking and hearing are based 
upon undcrstanding. And understanding arises neither through talking 
at length [vieles Reden] nor through busily hearing something “all 
around”. Only he who already understands can listen [zuhören]. 

Keeping silent is another essential possibility of discourse, and it has the 
same existential foundation. In talking with one another, the person who 
keeps silent can ‘make one understand’ (that is, he can develop an 
understanding), and he can do so mire authentically than the person 
who is never short of words. Speaking at length [Viel-sprechen] about 
something does not offer the slightest guarantee that thereby under- 
standing is advanced. On the contrary, talking extensively about some- 
thing, covers it up and brings what is understood to a sham clarity—the 
unintelligibility of the trivial. But to keep silent does not mean to be 
dumb. On the contrary, if a man is dumb, he still has a tendency to 
‘speak’. Such a person has not proved that he can keep silence; indeed, 
he entirely lacks the possibility of proving anything of the sort. And the 
person who is accustomed by Nature to speak little is no better able to 
show that he is keeping silent or that he is the sort of person who can do 
so. He who never says anything cannot keep silent at any given moment. 
Keeping silent authentically is possible only in genuine discoursing. To be 
able to keep silent, Dasein must have something to say—that is, it must 
have at its disposal an authentic and rich disclosedness of itself. In that 
case one’s reticence [Verschwiegenheit] makes something manifest, and 
does away with ‘idle talk’ [“Gerede”]. As a mode of discoursing, reticence 
Articulates the intelligibility of Dasein in so primordial a manner that it 
gives rise to a potentiality-for-hearing which is genuine, and to a Being- 
with-one-another which is transparent. 

Because discourse is constititutive for the Being of the “there” (that is, 
for states-of-mind and understanding), while “Dasein” means Being-in- 
the-world, Dasein as discursive Being-in, has already expressed itself. 
Dasein has language. Among the Greeks, their everyday existing was 
largely diverted into talking with one another, but at the same time they 
‘had eyes’ to see. Is it an accident that in both their pre-philosophical and 
their philosophical ways of interpreting Dasein, they defined the essence 
of man as {gov Adyov Exov? The later way of interpreting this definition 
of man in the sense of the animal rationale, ‘something living which has 
reason’, is not indeed ‘false’, but it covers up the phenomenal basis for this 
definition of “Dasein”. Man shows himself as the entity which talks. This 
does not signify that the possibility of vocal utterance is peculiar to him, 
but rather that he is the entity which is such as to discover the world and 


I. 5 Being and Time 200 


Dasein itself. The Greeks had no word for “language”; they understood 
this phenomenon ‘in the first instance’ as discourse. But because the Aoyos 
came into their philosophical ken primarily as assertion, this was the 
kind of logos which they took as their clue for working out the basic 
structures of the forms of discourse and its components. Grammar sought 
its foundations in the ‘logic’ of this logos. But this logic was based upon the 
ontology of the present-at-hand. The basic stock of ‘categories of signifi- 
cation’, which passed over into the subsequent science of language, and 
which in principle is still accepted as the standard today, is oriented 
towards discourse as assertion. But if on the contrary we take this phe- 
nomenon to have in principle the primordiality and breadth of an 
existentiale, then there emerges the necessity of re-establishing the science 
of language on foundations which are ontologicaily more primordial. 
The task of liberating grammar from logic requires beforehand a positive 
understanding of the basic a priort structure of discourse in general as an 
existentiale. It is not a task that can be carried through later on by im- 
proving and rounding out what has been handed down. Bearing this in 
mind, we must inquire into the basic forms in which it is possible to 
articulate anything understandable, and to do so in accordance with 
significations; and this articulation must not be confined to entities 
within-the-world which we cognize by considering them theoretically, 
and which we express in sentences. A doctrine of signification will not 
emerge autornatically even if we make a comprehensive comparison of as 
many languages as possible, and those which are most exotic. To accept, 
let us say, the philosophical horizon within which W. von Humboldt 
made language a problem, would be no less inadequate. The doctrine of 
signification is rooted in the ontology of Dasein. Whether it prospers or 
decays depends on the fate of this ontuloys 


In the last resort, philosophical resecr: -iust resolve to ask what kind 
of Being goes with language in gener. i.: : a kind of equipricnt ready- 
to-hand within-the-world, or has it Dos kind of Being, cr i! it neither 
oI these? What kind of Beine ‘oes la: .. or have, if there cn. besuch a 
Same as a ‘dead’ langun Wha: o oc “rise” and “decline” of a 
Ar rUAge IREAL ontole:; We pei + science of aNg uage, and the 
sung ofthe ontities wh. as for i: is obscure. Ever. the horizon 

any IN estigative e’ : aboui ved. Is it an accident that 
Ara, abhor hie  oocet'sigr.”* «x are ‘worldly’, sketched out 
within, Ge N fen OF SE ‚hat they are indeed often 

SON: “GAP Fn Des Tu nave cxistential-ontological 


necessity ? ard lit is necessary, why should wt be so? Philosophical research 
will have to dispense with the ‘philosophy of language’ if it is to inquire 


166 


210 Being and Time I. 5 


into ‘the ‘things themselves’ and attain the status of a problematic 
which has been cleared up conceptually. 

Our Interpretation of language has been designed merely to point out 
the ontological ‘locus’ of this phenomenon in Dascin’s state of Being, and 
especiaily to prepare the way for the following analysis, in which, taking 
as our clue a fundamental kind of Being belonging to discourse, in 
connection with other phenomena, we shall try to bring Dasein’s 
everydayness into view in a manner which is ontologically more 
primordial. 


B. The Everyday Being of the “There”, and the Falling of Dasein 

In going back to the existential structures of the disclosedness of Being- 
in-the-world, our Interpretation has, in a way, lost sight of Dasein’s 
everydayness. In our analysis, we must now regain this phenomenal 
horizon which was our thematica! starting-point. The question now arises: 
what are the existential characteristics of the disclosedness of Being-in-the- 
world, so far as the latter, as something which is everyday, maintains 
itself in the kind of Being of the “they”? Does the “they” have a state» 
of-mind which is specific to it, a special way of understanding, talking, 
and interpreting? It becomes all the more urgent to answer these ques- 
tions when we remeruber that proximally and for the most part Dasein 
is absorbed in che “they’’ and is mastered by it. Is not Dasein, as thrown 
Being-in-the-world, thrown proximally right into the publicness of the 
“they”? And what does this publicness mean, other than the specific 
disclosedness of the “they”? 

If understanding must be conceived primarily as Dasein’s potentiality- 
for-Being, then it is from an analysis of the way of understanding and 
interpreting which belongs to the “they” that we must gather which 
possibilities of its Being have been disclosed and appropriated by Dasein 
as “they”. In that case, however, these possibilities themselves make 
manifest an essential tendency of Being—one which belongs to everyday- 
ness. And finally, when this tendency has been explicated in an ontologic- 
ally adequate manner, it must unveil a primordial kind of Being of Dasein, 
in such a way, indeed, that from this kind of Being! the phenomenon of 
thrownness, to which we have called attention,-can be exhibited in its 
existential concreteness. 

In the first instance what is required is that the disclosedness of the 
“they”—that is, the everyday kind of Being of discourse, sight, and 
interpretation—should be made visible in certain definite phenomena. In 


1 Reading ‘Í. von ihr aus . . .”, The earliest editiöns omit ‘aus’; correction is made in 
a list of errata. ` l . 


ILs . Being and Time 211 


relation to these phenomena, it may not be superfluous to remark that our 
own Interpretation is purely ontological in its aims, and is far removed 
from any moralizing critique of everyday Dasein, and from the aspirations 
of a ‘philosophy of culture’. 


T 35. Idle Talk 

The expression ‘idle talk’ [“Gerede”] is not to be used here in a ‘dis- 
paraging’! signification. Terminologically, it signifies a positive pheno- 
menon which constitutes the kind of Being of everyday Dasein’s under- 
standing and interpreting. For the most part, discourse is expressed by 
being spoken out, and has always been so expressed; it is language.? But 
in that case understanding and interpretation already lie in what has thus 
been expressed. In language, as a way things have been expressed or 
spoken out [Ausgesprochenheit], there is hidden a way in which the under- 
standing of Dasein has been interpreted. This way of interpreting it is no 
more just present-at-hand than language is; on the contrary, its Being is 
itself of the character of Dasein. Proximally, and with certain limits, 
Dasein is constantly delivered over to this interpretedness, which controls 
and distributes the possibilities of average understanding and of the state-_ 168 
of-mind belonging to it. The way things have been expressed or spoken 
out is such that in the totality of contexts of signification into which it has 
been articulated, it preserves an understanding of the disclosed world 7 
and therewith, equiprimordially, an understanding of the Dasein-with of f 
Others and of one’s own Being-in. The understanding which has thus 
already been ‘‘deposited” in the way things have been expressed, pertains 
just as much to any traditional discoveredness of entities which may have 
been reached, as it does to one’s current understanding of Being and to 
whatever possibilities and horizons for fresh interpretation and conceptual 
Articulation may be available. But now we must go beyond a bare allusion 
to the Fact of this interpretedness of Dasein, and must inquire about the 
existential kind of Being of that discourse which is expressed and which 
expresses itself. If this cannot be conceived as something present-at-hand, 
what is its Being, and what does this tell us in principle about Dasein’s 
everyday kind of Beirig? 

Discourse which expresses itself is communication, Its tendency of 


1 These quotation marks are supplied only in the older editions. (It is not easy to trans- 
late ‘Gerede’ in a way which does not carry disparaging connotations. Fortunately 
Heidegger makes his meaning quite clear.) 

2 ‘Die Dede spricht sich zumeist aus und hat sich schon immer sepa wma Sie ist 
Sprache.’ As we have pointed out earlier (see our note 1, p. 190 H. 149 above), it is often 
sufficient to translate ‘aussprechen’ as ‘express’. In the present passage, however, the con- 
notation of ‘speaking out’ or ‘uttering’ seems especially important; we shall occasionally 
make it explitit in our translation by hendiadys or other devices, 


212 Being and Time I. 5 
Being is aimed at bringing the hearer to participate in disclosed Being 
towards what is talked about in the discourse. 

In the language which is spoken when one expresses oneself, there lies an 
average intelligibility; and in accordance with this intelligibility the dis- 
course which is communicated can be understood to a considerable extent, 
even if the hearer does not bring himself into such a kind of Being towards 
what the discourse is about as to have a primordial understanding of it. We 
do not so much understand the entities which are talked about; we already 
are listening only to what is said-in-the-talk as such. What is said-in-the- 
talk gets understood ; but what the talk is about is understood only approxi- 
mately and superficially. We have the same thing in view, because it is in the 
same averageness that we have a common understanding of what is said. 

Hearing and understanding have attached themselves beforehand to 
what is said-in-the-talk as such. The primary relationship-of-Being towards 
the entity talked about is not ‘imparted’ by communication;' but Being- 
with-one-another takes place in talking with one another and in concern 
with what is said-in-the-talk. To this Being-with-one-another, the fact 
that talking is going on is a matter of consequence.* The Being-said, the 
dictum, the pronouncement [Ausspruch]—all these now stand surety for the 
genuineness of the discourse and of the understanding which belongs to it, 
and for its appropriateness to the facts. And because this discoursing has 
lost its primary relationship-of-Being towards the entity talked about, or 
else has never achieved such a relationship, it does not communicate in 
such a way as to let this entity be appropriated in a primordial manner, 
but communicates rather by following the route of gossiping and passing 
the word along.® What is said-in-the-talk as such, spreads in wider circles 
and takes on an authoritative character. Things are so because one says so. 
Idle talk is constituted by just such gossiping and passing the word along 
—a process by which its initial lack of grounds to stand on [Bodenstandig- 
keit] becomes aggravated to complete groundlessness [Bodenlosigkeit]. 
And indeed this idle talk is not confined to vocal gossip, but even spreads 
to what we write, where it takes the form of ‘scribbling’ [das ““Gesch- 
reibe’']. In this latter case the gessip is not based so much upon hearsay. 
It feeds upon superficial reading [dem Angelesenen]. The average under- 
standing of the reader will never be able to decide what has been drawn 
from primordial sources with a struggle and how rauch is just gossip. The 
average understanding, moreover, will not want any such distinction, 
and does not need it, because, of course, it understands everything. 


1 ‘Die Mitteilung “‘teilt” nicht den primären Seinsbezug zum beredeten Seienden...’ 

2 ‘Ihm liegt daran, dass geredet wird.’ We have interpreted ‘Ihm’ as referring to ‘das 
Miteinandersein’, but other interpretations are grammatically possible. 

8‘... sondern auf dem Wege des Weiter- und Nachredens.’ 


.5 Being and Time 213 
The groundlessness of idle talk is no obstacle to its becoming public; in- 


stead it encourages this. Idle talk is the possibility of understanding every. 
thing without previously making the thing ane’s own. If this were done, idle 
talk would founder; and it already guards against such a danger. Idle talk 
is something which anyone-can rake up; it not only releases one from the 
task of genuinely understanding, but develops an undifferentiated kind of 
intelligibility, for which nothing is closed off any longer. 

Discourse, which belongs tothe essential state of Dasein’s Being and has a 
share in constituting Dasein’s disclosedness, has the possibility of becoming 
idle talk. And when it does so, it serves not so much to keep Being-in-the- 
world open for us in an articulated understanding, as rather to close it 
off, and cover up the entities within-the-world. To do this, one need not 
aim to deceive. Idle talk does not have the kind of Being which belongs to 
consciously passing off something as something else. The fact that something 
has been said groundlessly, and then gets passed along in further retelling, 
amounts to perverting the act of disclosing [Erchliessen] into an act of 
closing off [Verschliessen]. For what is said is always understood proxim- 
ally as ‘saying’ something—that is, an uncovering something. Thus, by 
its very nature, idle talk is a closing-off, since to go back to the ground of 
what is talked about is somethin which it leaves undone. 

This closing-off is aggravated afresh by the fact that an understanding 
of what is talked about is supposedly reached in idle talk. Because of this, 
idle talk discourages any new inquiry and any disputation, and in a 


„emma ee 


peculiar way y suppresses them and holds them back. 
This way in which things have been interpreted in idle talk has already 


established itself in Dasein. There are many things with which we first 
become acquainted in this way, and there is not a little which never gets 
beyond such an average understanding. This everyday way in which 
things have been interpreted is one into which Dasein has grown in the 
first instance, with never a possibility of extrication. In it, out of it, and 
against it, all genuine understanding, interpreting, and communicating, 
all re-discovering and appropriating anew, are performéd. In no case is a 
Dasein, untouched and unseduced by this way in which things have been 
interpreted, set before the open country of a ‘world-in-itself, so that it just 
beholds what it encounters. The dominance of the public way in which 
things have been interpreted has already been decisive even for the 
possibilities of having a mood—thtt is, for the basic way in which Dasein 
lets the world “matter” to it.! The “they” prescribes one’s state-of-mind, 


and determines what and how one ‘sees’. 

1‘, ,. über die Möglichkeiten des Gestimmtseins entschieden, das heisst \.ber die 
Grundart, in der sich das Dasein von der Welt angehen lässt.’ The second ‘über’ is found 
only in the later editions. 


170 


214 Being and Time I. 5 

Idle talk, which closes things off in the way we have designated, is the 
kind of Being which belongs to Daseir’s understanding when that under- R 
standing has been uprooted. But idle ta!k does not occur as a condition 
which is present-at-hand in something present-at-hand: idle talk has bcen 
uprooted existentially, and this uprooting is constant. Ontologically this 
means that when Dasein maintains itself in idle talk, it is--as Being-in- 
the-world—ciit off from its "primary and primordially genuine relation- ` 
ships- of Being. towards the world; towards Dasein-with, and tow towards its 
ver Bei ngin. Such a Dasein keeps floating unattached [in einer Schwebe]; 
yet in so doing, it is always alongside the world, with Others, and towards 
itself. To be uprooted in this manner is a posibiigelbenc only for an 
entity whose disclosedness is constituted by discourse as characterized by 
understanding and states-of-mind—-that is to say, for an entity whose 
disclosedness, in such an ontologically constitutive state, is its “there”, 
its ‘in-the-world’, Far from amounting to a ‘“‘not-Being” of Dasein, 
this uprooting is rather Dasein’s most everyday and most stubborn 
‘Reality’. 

Yet the obviousness and self-assurance of the average ways in which 
things have been interpreted, are such that while the particular Dasein 
drifts along towards an ever-increasing groundlessness as it floats, the 
uncanniness of this floating remains hidden from it under their protecting 
shelter. 


T 36. Curiosity 


In our analysis of understanding and of the disclosedness of the “there” 
in general, we have alluded to the lumen naturale, and designated the dis- 
closedness of Being-in as Dasein’s “clearing”, in which it first becomes 
possible to have something like sight. * Our conception of “sight” has been ° 
gained by looking at the basic kind of disclosure which is characteristic of 
Dasein—namely, understanding, in the sense of the genuine appropriation 
of those entities towards which Dasein can comport itself in accordance 
with its essential possibilities of Being. 

The basic state of sight shows itself in a peculiar tendency-of-Being 
which belongs_to everydayness—the tendency towards ‘seeing’. We 
designate this tendency by the term “curio sity’ [Neugier], which character- 
istically is not confined to seeing, but expresses the tendency towards a 
peculiar way of letting the world be encountered by us in perception. 
Our aim in Interpreting this phenomenon is in principle one which is 
existential-ontological. We do not restrict ourselves to an orientation 
towards cognition. Even at an early date (and in Greek philosophy this 

1 See H. 133 above. 


I. 5 Being and Time 215 
was no accident) cognition was conceived in terms of the ‘desire to see’. 
The treatise which stands first in the collection of Aristotle’s treatises on 
ontology begiris with the sentence: ardyres dvOpwirot rod eibévar dpéyovras 
¢vca. The care for seeing is essential to man’s Being.? This remark 
introduces an investigation in which A istatie seeks to uncover the source 
of ail icariued exploration of entities anc 1 their Being, by üerivin; it from 

aat species of Dasein’: I -ing which we have just me-itin-ed. This Greek 
tio rprristion of the exe er. cl genes of science is 2er accidental. It 


„ings io explicit under „u. ©, +" has already occa sketched out 


. iwtehand in the principle or Parme: ides: rò yap aùrè vnelv Eoriv re nal 


ciwe? Being is that «hich shows itself in the pure perception 
«tych belongs to beholdizg, and only iy such seeing dov: Being get dis- 
covered. Primordial and genuine truth hes in pure beholding. This thesis 
has remained the foundation of western philosophy ever since. The 
Hegelian dialectic found in it its motivating conception, and is possible 
aniy on the basis of it. 

The remarkable priority of ‘seeing’ ~as na:;red particularly by Augus- 
tine, in connection with his Interpretation of concuptscentia.*! “‘Ad oculos 
enim videre proprie pertinet.” (“Seeing belongs properly to the eyes.’’) 
“Utimur autem hoc verbo etiam in ceteris sensibus cum eos ad cognoscendum 
intendimus.” ("But we even use this word ‘seeing’ for the other senses when 
we devote them to cognizing.’’) “Neque enim dicimus : audi quid rutilet ; aut, 
olfac quam niteat; aut, gusta quam splendeat;‘aut, palpa quam fulgeat : videri enim 
dicuntur haec omnia.” (“For we do not say ‘Hear how it glows’, or ‘Smell 
how it glistens’, or “Taste how it:shines’, or ‘Feel how it flashes’; but we 
say of each, ‘See’; we say that all this is seen.”) “Dicimus autem non solum, 
vide quid luceat, gudd soli oculi sentire possunt.” (“We not only say, ‘See how 
that shines’, when the eyes alone can perceive it;”) “sed etiam, vide quid 
sonet » vide quid oleat; vide quid sapiat; vide quam durum sit ;” (“but we even 
say, ‘See how that sounds’, ‘See how that is scented’, ‘See how that tastes’, 
‘See how hard that is’.”) ““Ideogue generalis experisntia sensuum concupiscentia 
sicut dictum est oculorum vocatur, quia videndi officium in quo primatum ocult 
tenent, ettam ceteri sensus sibi de similitudine usurpant, cum aliquid cognitions 
explorant.” (“Therefore the experience of the senses in general is designated 


1°., nicht in der verengten Orientierung am Erkennen, das schon früh und in der 
griechischen Philosp iis nicht zufallig aus der “Lust zu sehen” oo wird.’ The 
earlier editions have ‘.. . am Erkennen, als welches schon früh . 

2 While the sentence Kom Aristotle is usually. translated, ‘All men by naturé desire to 
know’, Heidegger takes eiSévar in its ront meaning, ‘to see’, and connects cpéyorra 
(literally: ‘reach out for’) with ‘Sorge’ (‘care’). : 

S This sentence has been variously interpreted: “The most usual version is: ‘For thinking 
and being are the same. ” Heidegger, however, goes back to the original meaning of voeiv 
as ‘to perceive with the eyes’. 


171 


172 


216 Being and Time I.5 


as he ‘lust of the eyes’; for when the issue is one of knowing something, 
the other senses, by a certain resemblance, take to themselves the function 
of seeing—a function in which the eyes have priority.”’) 

What is to be said about this tendency just to perceive? Which existen- 
tial state of Dasein will become intelligible in the phenomenon of curiosity? 

Being-in-the-world is proximally absorbed in the world of concern. 
This concern is guided by circumspection, which discovers the ready-to- 
hand and preserves it as thus discovered. Whenever we have something 
to contribute or perform, circumspection gives us the route for proceeding 
with it, the means of carrying it out, the right opportunity, the appropriate 
moment. Concern may come to rest in the sense of one’s interrupting the 
performance and taking a rest, or it can do so by getting it finished. In rest, 
concern does not disappear; circumspection, however, becomes free and 
is no longer bound to the world of work. When we take a rest, care sub- 
sides into circumspection which has been set free. In the world of work, 
circumspective discovering has de-severing as the character of its Being. 
When circumspection has been set free, there is no longer anything ready- 
to-hand which we must concern ourselves with bringing close. But, as 
essentially de-severant, this circumspection provides itself with new 
possibilities of de-severing. This means that it tends away from what is 
most closely ready-to-hand, and into a far and alien world. Care becomes 
concern with the possibilities of seeing the ‘world’ merely as it looks while 
one tarries and takes a rest. Dasein seeks what is far away simply in order 
to bring it close to itself in the way it looks. Dasein lets itself be carried 
along [mitnehmen] solely by the looks of the world; in this kind of Being, 
it concerns itself with becoming rid of itself as Being-in-the-world and rid 
of its Being alongside that which, in the closest everyday manner, is ready- 
to-hand. 


When curiosity has become free, however, it concerns itself with seeing, 
not in. Pee pa been Er into a Being 
towards it) but just in order to.see. It seeks novelty only in € order to leap 
from it anew to another novelty, In tl this kind of seeing, that which is an 
issue for care does not lie in grasping ‘something and being knowingly in 
the truth; it lies rather in its possibilities of abandoning itself to the world. 
Therefore curiosity is characterized bya specific way of not tarrying-along- 
side what is closest. Consequently it t does not seek the leisure of tarrying 
observantly, but rather seeks restlessness and the excitement of continual 
novelty and changing. encounters. In not ‘tarrying, curiosity is concerned 
with the | constant possibility of d distraction. Curiosity has nothing to do with 


naaa a SN 
observing entities and marvelling at them—@avydtev. To be amazed to 
the point of not understanding is something in which it has no interest. 


I. 5 Be me 217 


e-e. 


ron: ‘and upon these 3 is founded the third essential a of 
this phéfiomenon, which we call the character of “never dwelling anywhere” 
[Aufenthaltslosigkeit]. Cuxiesity is everywhere and nowhere. This mode of 
Being-in-the-world reveals a new kind of Being of everyday lay Dasein—a 
kind in which Dasein is constantly uprooting itself. 

ge one may be curious. It says 
what one “must” have read and seen. In eing everywhere a and nowhere, 
curiosity _ is delivered over to idle talk. These two everyday modes of 
Being for discourse and 1 sight are not just present-at-hand side by side in 
their tendency to “uproot, but either of these ways-to-be drags the other one 
with it. Curiosity, for which nothing is closed off, and idle. talk, for which 
there is nothing that i is not undérstood; provide themselves (that is, the 
Dasein which is in this manner [dem so seienden Dasein]) ` with the guar- 
antee of a ‘life’ which, supposedly, is genuinely ‘lively’. But with this 
supposition a third phenomenon now shows itself, by which the disclosed- 
ness of everyday Dasein is characterized. 


37. Ambiguity 
When, in our en we > encounter the so: sort 


m. 
“a 


as such, and even to Dass: towards it 

Everything looks as if it were ae understood, genuinely taken 
hold of, genuinely spoken, _though at bottom it is not; or eda not 
look so, and yet at bottom it is. Ambiguity not only affects the way we 
avail ourselyes of what is accessible for use and enjoyment, and the way 
we manage it; ambiguity has already established itself in the under- 
standing as a à potentiality-for-Being, and in the way Dasein. pro ojects itself 
is up for discussion and what occurs,? and everyone discusses it; but 
everyone also knows already how to talk about what has to happen A 
about what is not yet up for discussion but ‘really’ must be done. Already 
everyone has surmised and scented out in advance what Others have also 
surmised and scented out. This Being-on-the scent is of course based upon 


1‘... sondern sie hat sich schon im Verstehen als Seinkönnen, in der Art des Entwurfs 
und der Vorgabe von Möglichkeiten des Daseins festgesetzt.’ 
2‘... was vorliegt und vorkommt... .’ 


173 


218 Being and Time I.5 


hearsay, for if anyone is genuinely ‘on the scent’ of anything, he does not 
speak about it; and this is the most entangling way in which ambiguity 
presents Dasein’s possibilities so that they will already be stifled in their 
power.! 

Even supposing that what “key” have surmised and scented out should 
cane day be actually translated inta, deeds, ambiguity has alr:ady taken 
„are that interest in what has been Realised will promptly die away. Indeed 
AIS Interest persists, in a kind of curiosity and idle talk, only so long as 
here is a possibility of a non-committal just-surmising-with-someone-else. 
Being “in on it” with someone [das Mit-dabei-sein] when one is on the 
scent, and so iong as one is on it, precludes one’s allegiance when what 
"as been surmised gets carried out. For in such a case Dasein is in every 
case forced back on itself. Idle talk and curiosity lose their power, and are 
already exacting their penalty.? When confronted with the carrying- 
through of what “they” have surmised together, idle talk readily estab- 
lishes that “they” “could have done that top”—for “they” have indeed 
surmised it together. In the end, idle talk is even indignant that what it 
has surmised and constantly demanded pow actually happens. In that case, 
indeed, the opportunity to keep on surmising has been snatched away. 

But when Dasein goes in for something in the reticence of carrying it 
through or even of genuinely breaking down on it, its time is a different 
time and, as seen by the public, an essentially slower time than that of 
idle talk, which ‘lives at a faster rate’. Idle talk will thus long since have 
gone on to something else which is currently the very newest thing. That 
which was earlier surmise and has now been carried through, has come too 
late if one looks at that which is newest. ‘Idle talk and curiosity take care 
in their ambiguity to ensure that what is genuinely and newly created is 
out of date as soon as it emerges before the public. Such a new creation 
can become free in its positive possibilities only if the idle talk which covers 
it up has become ineffective, and if the ‘common’ interest has died away. 

In the ambiguity of the way things have been publicly interpreted, 
talking about things ahead of the game.and making surmises about them 
curiously, gets passed off as what is really happening, while taking action 
and carrying something through get stamped as something merely sub- 
sequent and unimportant. Thus Dasein’s understanding in the “they” is 
constantly going wrong [versieht sich]. in its projects, as regards the genuine 
possibilities of Being. Dasein is always ambiguously ‘there’—that is to say, 
in a public disclosedness of Being-with-one-another where the loudest 


. ist die verfänglichste Weise, in der die Zweideutigkeit Möglichkeiten des Daseins 
vorgibt, um sie auch schon in ihrer Kraft zu ersticken.’ (Notice that ‘ihrer’ may refer to 
‘Zweideutigkeit’ or to ‘Möglichkeiten’ ): 
2 ‘Und sie rächen sich auch schon.’ 


h 5 Being and Tyme 219 
idle talk and the most ingenious curiosity keep “things moving’, where, in 
an everyday manner, everything (and at bottom nothing) is happening. 

This ambiguity is always tossing to curiosity that which it seeks; and 
it gives idle talk the semblance of having everything decided in it. 

But this kind of Being of the disclosedness of Being-in-the-world 
dominates also Being-with-one-another as such. The Other is proximally 
‘there’ in terms of what “they” have heard about him, what “they” say 
in their talk about him, and what “they” know about him. Into prim- 
ordial Being-with-one-another, idle talk first slips itself in between. 
Everyone keeps his eye on the Other first and next, watching how he will 
comport himself and what he will say in reply. Being-with-one-another 
in the “they” is by no means an indifferent side-by-side-ness in which 
everything has been settled, but rather an intent, ambiguous watching of 
one another, a secret and reciprocal listening-in. Under the mask of 
“for-one-another”, an “against-one-another” is in play. 

In this connection, we must notice that ambiguity does not first arise 
from aiming explicitly at disguise or distortion, and that it is not some- 
thing which the individual Dasein first conjures up. It is already implied 
in Being with one another, as thrown Being-with-one-another in a world. 
Publicly, however, it is quite hidden; apd “they will always defend thein- 
selves against this Interpretation of the kind of Being which belongs to the 
way things have been interpreted by the “‘they’’, lest it should prove 
correct. It would be a misunderstanding if we were to seek to have the 
explication of these nhenomena confirmed by looking to the ‘‘they” for 
agreement. 

The phenomena of idle talk, curiosity, and ambiguity have been set 
forth in such a manner as to indicate that they are already interconnected 
in their Being. We must now grasp in an existential-ontological manner 
the kind of Being which belongs to this interconnection. The basic kind 
of Being which belongs to everydayness is to be understood within the 
horizon of those structures of Dasein’s Being which have been hitherto 
obtained. 


38. Falling and Thrownness 


Idle talk, curiosity and ambiguity characterize the way in which, in 
an everyday manner, Dasein is its ‘there’—the disclosedness of Being-in- 
the-world. As definite existential characteristics, these are not present-at- 
hand in Dasein, but help to make up its Being. In these, and iff the way 
they are interconnected in their Being, there is revealed a basic kind of 
Being which belongs to everydayness; we call this the ‘‘falling’’* of Dasein. 


1 ‘Verfallen’. See our note 2, p. 42, H. 21 above, and note 1, p. 172, H. 194 above. 


179 


220 Being and Time I. 5 


This term does not express any negative evaluation, but is used to signify 
that Dasein is proximally and for the most part alongside the ‘world’ of its 
concern, This “absorption in...’ [Aufgehen bei .. .] has mostly the 


character of Being-lost in the publicness of the “they”. Dasein has, in the 


first instance, fallen away [abgefallen] from itself as an authentic pot- 
entiality for Being its Self, and has fallen into the ‘world’.! “Fallenness” 
its Gia eae maakt ao stanton ts Bay o a, in so far 
as the latter is guided by idle talk, curiosity, and ambiguity. Through the 
Interpretation of falling, what we have called the “inauthenticity” of 
Dasein*!!! may now be defined more precisely. On no account, however, 
do the terms “inauthentic” and “non-authentic” signify ‘really not’,? as 
if in this mode of Being, Dasein were altogether to lose its Being. “In- 
authenticity””-does not mean anything like Being-no-longer-in-the-world, 
but amounts rather to a quite distinctive kind of Being-in-the-world—the 
kind which. is completely fascinated by the ‘world’ and by the Dasein- 
with of ‚Others in the “they”. Not-Being-its-self [Das Nicht-es-selbst-sein] 
functions as a positive possibility of that entity which, ın its essential con- 
cern, is absorbed in a world. This kind of not-Being has to be conceived as 
that kind of Being which is closest to Dasein and in which Dasein main- 
tains itself for the most part. 

So neither must we take the fallenness of Dasein as a ‘fall’ from a purer 
and higher ‘primal status’. Not only do we lack any experience of this 
ontically, but ontologically we lack any possibilities or clues for Inter- 
preting it. 


a as factical Being-in-the-world, is something from 
Ea 


which it ha y fallen away. And it has not fallen into some entity 


ee ee re 


which it comes upon for the first time in the course of its Being, or even 


Lan con 


of Dasein itself. It makes no assertion about Dasein as something present- 
at-hand, or about present-at-hand relations to entities from which Dasein 
‘is descended’ or with which Dasein has subsequently wound up in some 
sort of commercium. 

We would also misunderstand the ontologico-existential structure of 
falling? if we were to ascribe to it the sense of a bad and deplorable 
ontical property of which, perhaps, more advanced stages of human 
culture might be able to rid themselves. 


1*,..und an die ‘‘Welt”’ verfallen.’ While we shall follow English idioms by translating 
‘an die ‘‘Welt”’ as ‘into the “world” °’ in contexts such as this, the preposition ‘into’ is 
hardly the correct one. The idea is rather that of falling at the world or collapsing against it. 

2‘Un- und nichteigentlich, bedeutet aber keineswegs "eigentlich nicht” ...’ 

3 ‘Die ontologisch-existenziale Struktur des Verfallens . . .‘ The words ‘des Verfallens’ 
do not appear in the earlier editions. 


I.5 Being and Time 221 

Neither in our first allusion to Being-in-the-world as Dasein’s basic 
state, nor in our characterization of its constitutive structural items, did 
we go beyond an analysis of the constitution of this kind of Being and take 
note of its character asa phenomenon. We have indeed described concern 
and solicitude, as the possible basic kinds of Being-in. But we did not 
discuss the question of the everyday kind of Being of these ways in which 
one may be. We also showed that Being-in is something quite different 
from a mere confrontation, whether by way of observation or by way of 
action; that is, it is not the Being-present-at-hand-together of a subject 
and an Object. Nevertheless, it must still have seemed that Being-in-the- 
world has the function of a rigid framework, within which Dasein’s 
possible ways of comporting itself towards its world run their course 
without touching the ‘framework’ itself as regards its Being. But this 
supposed ‘framework’ itself helps make up the kind of Being which is 


Dasein’s. An existential mode of Being-in-the-world is documented in the: 


phenomenon of falling. 

Idle talk discloses to Dasein a Being towards its world, towards Others, 
and towards itself—a Being in which these are understood, but in a mode 
‘of groundless floating. Curiosity discloses everything and anything, yet in 
such a way that Being-in is everywhere and nowhere, Ambiguity hides 
nothing from Dasein’s understanding, but only in order that Being-in- 
the-world should be suppressed in this uprooted “everywhere and 
nowhere”, 

By elucidating ontologically the kind of Being belonging to everyday 
Being-in-the-world as it shows through in these phenomena, we first 
arrive at an existentially adequate determination of Dasein’s basic state, 
Which is the structure that shows us the ‘movement’ of falling? _ 

Idle talk and the way things have been publicly interpreted (which idle 
talk includes) constitute themselves in Being-with-one-another. Idle talk 
is not something present-at-hand for itself within the world, as a product 
detached from Being-with-one-another. And it is just as far from letting 
itself be volatilized to something ‘universal’ which, because it belongs 
essentially to nobody, is ‘really’ nothing and occurs as ‘Real’ only in the 
individual Dasein which speaks. Idle talk is the kind of Being that belongs 
to Being-with-one-another itself; it does not first arise through certain 
circumstances which have ,effects upon Dasein ‘from outside’. ian if 


ein itself, in idle talk and in the way things have been publicly 
preted, presents to itself the possibility of losing itself in the “they” "aad 
falling into groundlessness, this tells us that Dasein prepares- for itself a 
const ion towards falling. Being-in-the-world _is in_ itself 
tempting [versucherisch]. 


177 


178 


222 Being and Time I. 5 


Since the way in which things have been publicly interpreted has 
already become a temptation to itself in this manner, it holds Dasein fast 
in its fallenness. Idle ialk and ambiguity, having seen everything, having 
understood everything, develop the supposition that Dasein’s disclosed- 
ness, which is so available and so prevalent, can guarantee to Dasein that 
all the possibilities of its Being will be secure, genuine, and full, Through 
the self-certainty and decidedness of the “they”, it gets spread abroad 
increasingly that there is no need of authentic understanding or the state- 


of-mind that goes with it. The supposition of the “they” that one is 
leading and sustaining a full a full and genume Te’ brings Dareia tranquillity, 
for which everything is ‘in the best-of order’ and all doors are open. 


ee e 


Falling Being-in-the-world, which tempts_itself, is at the same time 
tranquillizing [Be ces R en 


into stagnation and i gg uninhibited *hustle’ 
(‘‘Betriebs” J.” "Being-fallen into the ‘world’ does not now somehow 


come to rest. The The tempting tranquillization aggravates the falling, With 
special regard to the interpretation of Dasein, the opinion may now arise 
that understanding the most alien cultures and ‘synthesizing’ them with 
one’s own may lead to Dasein’s becoming for the first time thordughly 
and genuinely enlightened about itself. Versatile curiosity and restlessly 
“knowing it all’? masquerade as a universal understanding of Dasein. But 
at bottom it remains indefinite what is really to be understood, and the 
question has not even been asked. Nor has it been understood that under- 
standing itself is a potentiality-for-Being which must be made free in one’s 
ownmost Dasein alone. asein, t uillized, and ‘understanding’ 
everything, thus compares itself with everything, it drifts along - towards 
an alienatic n [Entfremdung] in which its ownmost potentiality-for-Beéing 


poe EL Komt, Falling Being-in-the-world is not-only tempting and 
tran 


eee 

et this alienation cannot mean that Dasein gets factically torn away 
from itself. “On the contrary, this alienation drives it into a kind of Being 
which ee Oe ee € ’, tempting itself 
with: all possibilities of explanation, so that the very naeh 

A : Su a en FR: | 

and ‘typologies’ which it has brought about! are themselves already 
becoming something that cannot be an ata a glance. This alienation 


ne ne. 


. die ren geo Kr nn follow the difilior scio of the earlier editions. 
The, newer editions have ‘. _ die von ihr gezeigten...’ (‘... which it has shown .. .’). 
See H. 304 below, and our ‘note ad loc. 


I.5 Being and Time 223° 
re ane a possible | kind of Being of itself. ane alienation ot 


.- ae ae ieee 9 coat 


“The en we have nr ETN tranquilizing, 

‘lienation and self-entangling (entanglement)—-characterize the specific 
«ind of Being which belongs to falling. This ‘movement’ of Dasein in its 
own Being, we call its “downward plunge” [Absturz]. Dasein plunges out 
of itself into.itself, into the groundlessness and nullit lity of inauthentic 
everydayness. But this plunge remains hidden from Dasein by the way 
things have been publicly interpreted, so much so, indeed, that it gets 
interpreted as a way of ‘ascending’ and ‘living concretely’. 

This downward aise into and within the groundtessness-of- the in- 
authentic Being of the ‘ hey”, has a kind of motion which constantly 
tears the understanding = from the projecting of authentic possibil- 
ities, and into the tranquillized supposition thät it possesses everything, 
or that everything is within its De hig the a is thus 
always with a sham of ae E movement of falling i is charac- 
terized by turbulence [Wirbel]. 


"Falling ‘is not onl existentially determinative for Being-in-the-world. 
At the Game time turbulence makes matifa thar the-thrownaess which 


can obtrude itself upon Dasein in its state-of-mind, has the character of 

throwing and of movement. Thrownness is neither a ‘fact that is finished’ 
i Te Y 

nor a Fact that is settled.’ 1 Dasein’s facticity i is such that as long as it is 


nn u — 


what it is, aye in remains i in the throw, and i is is sucked d into the turbulence 


be se en phenosicnally, belongs to Dasein 1, for wi in, for which, in its Being, that v very 


rn 


is an issue, Dasein exists factically. 

ów that falling has been exhibited, have we not set forth a phe- 
nomenon which speaks directly against the definition we have used in 
indicating the formal idea of existence ? Can Dasein be conceived as an 
entity for which, in its Being, its potentiality-for-Being is an issue, if this 
entity, in its very everydayness, has lost itself, and, in falling, ‘lives’ away 
from itself? But falling into the world would be phenomenal ‘evidence’ 
against the existentiality of Dasein only if Dasein were regarded as an 
isolated “I” or subject, as a self-point from which it moves away. In that 
case, the world would be an Object. Falling into the world would then 
have to be re-Interpreted ontologically as Being-present-at-hand in the: 
manner of an entity within-the-world. If, however, we keep in mind 


1 ‘Die Geworfenheit ist nicht nur nicht eine “fertige Tatsache”, sondern auch nickt ein: 
abgeschlossenes Faktum.’ 


179 


180 


224 Being and Time 1.5 
that Dasein’s Being is in the state of Being-in-the-world, as we have already 
pointed out, then it becomes manifest that falling, as a kind of Being of. this 
Being-in, affords us rather the most elemental evidence Jor Dasein Sexis ten- 
tiality. In falli 
world is the issue, ev icity. Dasein can ‘fall 
only Because Being-in-the-world_understandingly with a state-of-mind 
is an issue-forit_On the other hand, authentic existence is not something 


which floats above fi falling everydayness; existentially, itis only a modified 
way in which such- everydayness is seized upan. 


The phenomenon of falling does not give us something like a ‘night 
view’ of Dasein, a property which occurs ontically and may serve to 
round out the innocuous aspects of this entity: Falling reveals an essential 
ontological structure of Dasein itself. Far from determining its nocturnal 
side, it constitutes all Dasein’s days in their everydayness. 

It follows that our existential-ontological Interpretation makes no 
ontical assertion about the ‘corruption of human Nature’, not because the 
necessary evidence is lacking, but because the probtematic of this Inter- 
pretation is prior to any assertion about corruption or incorruption. 
Falling is conceived ontologically. as a kind of motion. Ontically, we have 
not decided whether man is ‘drunk with sin’ and in the status corruptionis, . 
whether he walks in the status integritatis, or whether he finds himself in 
an intermediate stage, the status gratiae. But in so far as any faith or 
‘world view’, makes any such assertions, and if it asserts anything abeut 
Dasein as Being-in-the-world, it must come back to the existential 
structures which we have sct forth, provided that its assertions are to make 
a claim to conceptual understanding. 

The leading question of this chapter has been about the Being of the 
“there”. Our theme has been the ontologica’! Constitution of the disclosed- 
ness which essentially belongs to Dasein. The Being of that disclosed- 
ness is constituted by states-of-mind, understanding, and discourse. Its 
everyday--kind. of Being is, s characterized by idle talk, curiosity, .and 
ambiguity. These show. us the movement of. falling, with tem temptation, 
tranquillizing, alienation, and entanglement as its essential characteristics- 

But with this analysis, the whole existential constitution of Dasein has 
been laid bare in its principal features, and we have obtained the phe- 


nomenal ground for a ‘comprehensive’ Interpretation of Dasein’s Being 
as care. | 


Vi 
CARE AS THE BEING OF DASEIN 


| 39. The Question of the Primordial Totality of Dasein’s Structural Whole 


BEING-IN-THE-WORLD is a structure which is primordrally and con- 
stantly whole. In the m One, Chapters 2-5) 
this structure has been elucidated phenomenally as a «hole: and also in its 
constitutive items, though always on this basis. The preliminary glance 
which we gave to the whole of this phenomenon in the beginning! has 
now lost the emptiness of our first general sketch of it. To be sure, the 
constitution of the structural whole and its everyday kind of Being, is 
phenomenally so manifold that it can easily obstruct our looking at the 
whole as such phenomenologically in a way which unified. But we may 
look at it more freely and our unified view of it may be held in readiness 
more securely if we now caise the question towards which we have been 
working in our preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein in general: 
“how is the totality of that structural whole which we have pointed out to be defined 
in an existential-ontological manner?” 

Dasein exists factically. We shall inquire whether existentiality ard 
facticity have an ontological unity, or whether facticity belongs essentially 
to existentiality. Because Das+in cssentially has a state-of-mind belonging 
to it, Dasein has a kind of Being in which it is brought before itself and 
becomes disclosed to itself in its thrownness. But thrownness, as a kind of 
Being, belongs to an entity which in each case is its possibilities, and is 
them in such a way that it understands itself in these possibilities and in 
terms of them, projecting itself upon them. Being alongside the ready-to- 
hand, belongs just as primordially to Being-in-the-world as does Being- 
with Others; and Being-in-the-world is in each case for the sake of 


itself. (he Self, however, is ‚proxunall and for the most part inauthentic, 


the they-self. Being-in-the- s fallen. “Accordingly Dasein’s 


ee ame san be defined as ‘ «Being Tithe. world which is falling 
and disclosed, thrown and projecting, and for which its ownmast potentiality-for-Being 
is an 1 issue, Tu bol h in its Being alongside the ‘worla’ and in its B Being-with Others” 


H 


161 


182 


28 Being and Time 1.6 

Can we succeed in grasping this structural whole of Dasein’s every- 
dayness in its totality? Can Dasein’s Being be brought out in such a 
unitary nner that in terms of it the essential equiprimordiality of the 
structure. , we have pointed vut, as well as their existential puss’bilities of 
modify vion, will become intelligible? Dees our present ayp oaci ora 
the existe:.*!al analytic provide us an avenue for 7 vine at ‘ı ia Being 
phenomenuaily ? . 

To put :t negatively, it is beyond question tat the icvauty of the 
structural whole is not to be reached by building it up out of elements. 
For this we would need an architect’s plan. The “zing of Dase:n, upon 
which the structural whole as such is ontologically supported, becomes 
accessible to us when we look all the way through this whole t+ a single 
primordially unitary phenomenon which is already in this whole in such 


- a way that it provides the ontological foundation for each structural item 


in its structural possibility. Thus we cannot Interpret this “coniprehen- 
sively’ by a process of gathering up what we have hitherto gained and 
taking it all together. The question of Dasein’s basic existential character 
is essentially different from that of the Being of something present-at- 
hand. Our everyday environmental experiencing [Erfahren], which 
remains directed both ontically and ontologically towards entities within- 
the-world, is not the sort of thing which can present Dasein in an ontically 
primordial manner for ontological analysis. Similarly our immanent per- 
ception of Experiences [Erlebnissen] fails to provide a clue which is 
ontologically adequate. On the other hand, Dasein’s Being is not be to 
deduced from an idea of man. Does the Interpretation of Dasein which we 
have hitherto given permit us to infer what Dasein, ‘from tts own standpoint, 
demands as the only appropriate ontico-ontological way of access to itself? 

An understanding of Being belongs to Dasein’s ontological structure. 
As something that is [Seiend], it is disclosed to itself in its Being. The 
kind sf Being which belongs to this disclosedness is constituted by state- 
of-mınd and understanding. Is there in Dasein an understanding state- 
of-mind in which Dasein has been disclosed to itself in some distinctive 
way? 

If the existential analytic of Dasein is to retain clarity in principle as to 
its function in fundamental ontology, then in order to master its provis- 
ional task of exhibiting Dasein’s Being, it must seek for one of the most far- 
reaching and most primordial possibilities of disclosure—one that lies in 
Dasein itself. The way of disclosure in which Dasein brings itself before 


‘itself must be such that in it Dasein becomes accessible as simplified in a. 


certain‘manner. With what is thus disclosed, the structural totality of the 
Being we seek must then come to light in an elemental way. 


I. 6 Being and Time 227 


As a state-of-mind which will satisfy these methodological requirements, 
the phenemonon of anxiety! will be made basic for our analysis. In working 
out this basic state-ol-mind and characterizing ontologically what is dis- 


Seen ~—_— 


closed in it as such, we shall take the phenomenon of falling as our point 


u — 


of departure, and distinguish anxiety from the kindred phenomenon of 


fear, which we have analysed earlier. As one of Dasein’s possibilities of 
Being, anxiety—together with Dasein itself as disclosed in it—provides 
the phenomenal basis for explicitly grasping Dasein’s primordial totality 
of Being. Dasein’s Being reveals itself as care. Ifiwe are to work out this 
basie existential phenomenony we must distinguish it from phenomena 
which might be proximally identified with care, such as will, wish, 
addiction, and urge.* Care cannot be derived from these, since they 
themselves are founded upon it. a 

Like every ontological analysis, the ontological Interpretation of Dasein 
as care, with whatever we may gain from such an Interpretation, lies far 
from what is accessible to the pre-ontological understanding of Being or 
even to our ontical acquaintance with entities, It is not surprising that 
when the common understanding has regard to that with which it has 
only ontical familiarity, that which is known ontologically seems rather 
strange to it. In spite of this, even the ontical approach with which we 
have tried to Interpret Dasein ontologically as care, may appear far- 
fetched and theoretically contrived, to say nothing of the act of violence 
one might discern in our setting aside the confirmed traditional definition 
of “man”. Accordingly our existential Interpretation of Dasein as care 
requires pre-ontological confirmation. This lies in demonstrating that no 
sooner has Dasein expressed anything about itself to itself, than it has 
already interpreted itself as care (cura), even though it has done so only 
pre-ontologically. 

The analytic of Dasein, which is proceeding towards the phenomenon of 
care, is to prepare the way for the problematic of fundamental ontology— 
the question of the meaning of Being in general. In order that we may turn our 

glance explicitly upon this in the light of what we have gained, and go 
beyond the special task of an existentially a prior: anthropology, we must 
look back and get a more penetrating grasp of the phenomena which are 
most intimately connected with our leading question—the question of 
Being. These phenomena are those very ways of Being which we have been 
hitherto explaining: readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand, as attributes 

1 ‘Angst’. While this word has generally been translated as ‘anxiety’ in the post- 
Freudian psychological literature, it appears as ‘dread’ in the translations of Kierkegaard 
and in a number of discussions of Heidegger. In some ways ‘uneasiness’ or ‘malaise’ would 
be more appropriate still. : Sg 

er Wille, unsch, Hang und Drang.’ For further discussion see H. 194 ff. below. . 


184 


228 Being and Time I. 6 


of entities within-the-world whose character is not that of Dasein. Because 
the ontological problematic of Being has heretofore been understood 
primarily in the sense of presence-at-hand (‘Reality’, ‘world-actuality’), 
while the nature of Dasein’s Being has remained ontologically undeter- 
mined, we need to discuss the ontological interconnections of care, world- 
hood, readiness-to-hand, and presence-at-hand (Reality). This will lead 
to a more precise characterization of the concept of Reality in the context 
of a discussion of the epistemological questions oriented by this idea which 
have been raised in realism and idealism. 

Entities are, quite independently of the experience by which dèy are 
disclosed, the acquaintance in which they are discovered, and the grasping 
in which their nature is ascertained. But Being ‘is’ only in the under- 
standing of those entities to whose Being something like an understanding 
of Being belongs. Hence Being can be something unconceptualized, but 
it never completely fails to be understood. In ontological problematics 
Being and truth have, from time immemorial, been brought together if not 
entirely identified. This is evidence that there is a necessary connecton 
between Being and understanding, even if it may perhaps be hidden in its 
primordial grounds. If we are to give an adequate preparation for the 
question of Being, the phenomenon of truth must be ontologically clarified. 
This will be accomplished in the first instance on the basis of what we 
have gained in our foregoing Interpretation, in connection with the pheno- 
mena of disclosedness and discoveredness, interpretation and assertion. 

Thus our preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein will conclude 
with the following themes: the basic state-of-mind of anxiety as a distinc- 
tive way in which Dasein is disclosed (Section 40); Dasein’s Being as care 
(Section 41); the confirmation of the existential Interpretation of Dasein 
as care in terms of Dasein’s pre-ontological way of interpreting itself 
(Section 42); Dasein, worldhood, and Reality (Section 43); Dasein, dis- 
closedness, and truth (Section 44). 


| 40. The Basic State-of-mind of Anxiety as a Distinctive Way in which Dasein 
is Disclosed 
One of Dasein’s possibilities of Being is to give us ontical ‘information’ 
about Dasein itself as an entity. Such information is possible only in that 
disclosedness which belongs to Dasein and which is grounded in state-of- 
mind and understanding. How far is anxiety a state-of-mind which is 
distinctive? How is it that in anxiety Dasein gets brought betore itself 


‘through its own Being, so that we can define phenomenologically the 


character of the entity disclosed in anxiety, and define it as such in its 
Being, or make adequate preparations for doing so? 


I. 6 Being and Time 229 


Since our aim is to proceed towards the Being of the totality of the 
structural whole, we shall take as our, point of departure the concrete 
analyses of falling which we have just carried through, Dasein’s absorption 
inthe “they” and its absorption i in the ‘world’ of its concern, make 
manifest — like a fleeing of I Dasein in the face of itself—of itself as 
an authentic ic potentiality-for-Being-its-Self.1 T This ph is phenomenon of Dasein’s 
fleeing in the face of itself and in the face of its its ts authenticity, seems at least 
a suitable phenomenal basis for the following investigation. But to bring 
itself face to face with itself, is precisely what Dasein doesnot do when it thus 
flees. It turns away from itself in accordance with its ownmost inertia [Zug] 
offalling. In investigating such phenomena, however, we must be careful not 
to confuse ontico-existentiell characterization with ontologico-existential 
Interpretation nor may we overlook the positive phenomenal bases pro- 
vided for this Interpretation by such a characterization. 

From an existentiell point of view, the authenticity-of Being-one’s-Self 
has of course been closed off and thrust aside in falling; but to be thus 
closed off is merely the privation of a disclosedness which manifests itself 
phenomenally in the fact that Dasein’s fleeing is a fleeing in the face of 
itself. That in the face of which Dasein flees, is precisely what Dasein comes 
up ‘behind’.? Only to the extent that Dasein has been brought before 
itself in an ontologically essential manner through whatever disclosedness 
belongs to it, can it flee in the Jar: of that 1 in the face of which it. flees. To be 
sure, that in the face 
[Abkehr] in falling; nor is it experienced ev even in turning thither [Hınkehr]. 
Rather, in turning aw vay from it, it is s disclosed ‘there’. This existentiell- 
ontical tur turning-away, by reason of its character as a disclosure, makes it 
phenomenally possible fo grasp existential-ontologically that in the face 
of which Dasein flees, and to grasp it as such. Within the ontica! ‘away- 
from’ which such turning-away implies, that in the face of which Dasein 
flees can be understood and conceptualized by~turning thither’ iv. a way 
which is phens:nenologically Interpretative. 

So in orientis: our analysis by the phenomenon of falling, we are not 
in principle cona‘ med to be without any prospect of learning someth.ing 
ontologically about the Dasein disclosed in that phenomenon. On the 
contrary, herc, least of all, has our Interpretation. been surrendered to an 
artificial way in which Dasein grasps itself; it merely carries out the 


1‘ „. offenbart so etwas wie eine Flucht des Da$eins vor ihm selbst als eigertlichem 
Selbst-sein-könner.’ ‘the point of this paragraph is that if we are to study the totahiy of 
Dasein, Dasein n:.:-: i x¢ brought ‘before itself” or ‘face to face with itself’ (“vor cs selbst"; 
and the fact that Dasein flees ‘from itself” or ‘in the face of itself” (‘vor thm selbst’), which 
may seem at first to lead us off the track, is actually very germane to our inquiry. 


2 ‘Im Wovor der Flucht kommt das Dasein gerade “hinter” ihm her.’ 


78 


230 Being and Time 1.6 


explication of what Dasein itself ontically discloses. The possibility of 
proceeding towards Dasein’s Being by going along with it and following 
it up [Mit- und Nachgehen] Interpretatively with an understanding and 
the state-of-mind that goes with it, is the greater, the more primordial is 
that phenomenon which functions methodologically as a disclosive state- 
of-mind. It might be contended that anxiety performs some such fupction. 

We are not entirely unprepared for the analysis of anxiety. Of course it 
still remains obscure how this is connected ontologically with fear. 
Obviously these are kindred phenomena. This is betokened by the fact 
that for the most part they have not been distinguished from one another: 
that which is fear, gets designated as ‘‘anxiety”’, while that which has the 
character of anxiety, gets called “fear”. We shall try to proceed towards 
the phenomenon of anxiety step by step. 

Dasein’ s falling into the ‘they.’ and the ‘world’ of its concern, is what 


m al e 


re-calted a He 
ei ae “Heeing’ in the face of itself. But one is not necessarily 
fe Shing back in ie back in the face of something or turns away 
rom it. Shrinking back in the face ce of what fi fear d dise! koses—in the face of 


the character of fedas Our Tnterpretanencc of fear I 3 Hateokmiad | has 
shown that in each casé that in the face of which ua fear is a detrimental 
entity within-the-world which comes from some definite region but is 
Be Eee itself close, and vet might :: cay away, In falling, 
Dasein turns away from itself. That in the face of which it thus shrinks 
ples in any y case, be an entity: with the chara: cter of threatening: ‘yet 
Dasein iael TI That i in the face of. which it rh shrinks back dannii be 
taken as-something ‘fearsome’, for anything ` Ton. is sess encoun- 
tered as an enti ty within-the- world: The only threat 

‘fearsome’ and which gets discovered in fear, always comes from entities 
within-the-world-. 

Thus the turning-away of falling is not a fleeing that is founded upon a 
fear of of entities within-the-w world. Fleeing that is so grounded is still less 
a character of this turning-away, when what this turning-away does is 
precisely to turn thither towards entities within-the-world by absorbing 
itself in them. The furning-away of falling is grounded rather in anxie ety, which i in 
turn is what first makes fear possible. 

To understand this talk about Dasein’s fleeing in the face of itself in 
falling, we must recall that Being-in-the-world is a basic state of Dasein. 
Thatin the he face of which one has anxiety [das Wovor der Angst] is Being-in-the- 
world as-such, What is the difference phenomenally between that in the 
face of which anziety i is anxious [sich ängstet] and that in the face of 


1.6 Being and Time 231 


which fear is afraid? That in the face of which one has anxiety is, not an an 
aa a Thus it is essentially incapable_of having an an 


n- eee ee 


= of which ¢ one is anxious is completely indefinite. Not nie does this 
indefiniteness leave e factically undecided which entity within-the-world is 


ne a ie 


threatening us, ‘but it also tells us that entities within-the-world a:e not 
‘relevant’ at all. Nothing which is ready-to-hand or present-at-hand 
within the world functions as that in the face of which anxiety is anxious. 
Here the totality of involvements of the ready-to-hand and the present- 
at-hand discovered within-the-world, is, as such, of no consequence; it 


collapses into ved the world has the character. of completely la lacking 


Accordingly, when something: duestcning brings itself close se, anxiety 


= — oo ma` 


does not ‘see’ any def any di ‘here’ or ‘yonder’ from which it comes. That in 
the face of which one one has anxiety is characterized by y the fact that what 


a. r)n 
threatens i3 s nowhere. € a ee not ot know’ vrhat that in 2 the face of 


re en 


ae 


where’ hee st. The obstinacy of ne “nothing and a 


ae ee ee — 


the face of which « one has ne has anxie anxiety. The utter neei ane which makes itself 
known in the “nothing and nowhere”, does not signify that the world is 
absent, but telis us that entities within-the-world are of so little import- 
ance in themselves that on the basis of this insignificance of what is within- 
the-world, the world in its worldhood is all that still obtrudes itself. 

What oppresses us is not this or that, nor is it the summation of every- 
thing present-at-hand; it is rather the possibility of the ready-to-hand in 
general; that is to say, it is the world itself. When anxiety has subsided, 
then in our everyday way of talking we are accustomed to say that ‘it was 
really nothing’. And what it was, indeed, does get reached ontically by 


such a way of talking. Everyday discourse tends towards eee itseif 


with the ready-to-hand and talking about it. ‘That in 
anxiety is anxious is nothing ready-to-hand within the-world. But 


232 Being and Time I. 6 
“nothing ready-to-hand”, which only our everyday circumspective dis-_ 
course understands, is not totally nothing.! The “nothing” of readiness» 
to-hand is grounded in the most primordial ‘something’—in the world. 
Ontologically, however, the world belongs essentially to Dascin’s Being as 
-in- orld. if the “‘nothing”—that is, the he world as such— 
exhibits itself as that in the face of which one has anxiety, this means 
that Bang-in- re ET mai l 
Being-anxious discloses, primordially and directly, the world as world. 
It is not the case, say, that the world first gets thought of by deliberating 
about it, just by itself, without regard for the entities within-the-world, 
and that, i in the face of this world, anxiety then arises; what is rather the 


-a o m 


case is that the world as world is disclosed first and foremust by anxiety, as 


ng ee cae | ——— 


a mode of state-of-mind. This does not signify, however, ı ee in anxiety 
the worldhood of the world gets conceptualized. 


Anxiety is not only anxiety inthe face of something, but, as a state-of- 
mind, it is also s also anxiety about something. That which anxiety is profoundly 
anxious [sich ich abängstet] abou about is not a definite kind of Being for Dasein or 

> a definite possibility for it. Indeed t the threat itself is indefinite, and there- 


A fore cannot penetrate th : threateningly to to this or that factically cancrete 


te —_—-- Are nn 


x” potentiality-for-Being. . That t which anxiety is anxious about is Being-in- 


ee T n. 


the “world itself. In ar n anxiety w "what is at is environmentally ready-to-hand sinks 
away, “and so so, in general, do do entities within-the-world. The ‘world’ can 


thus takes away from Dasein the possibility of understanding itself, as it 
falls, in terms of the ‘world’ and the way things have been publicly inter- 


preted. Anxiety throws I aoe which it is anxious about 
—its en is poteatiality-for eing-in-the-world. « Anxiety i individual lalizes 


Beer as s the only kind of thing which it can be of its owü “accord as 
` something individualized i in individualization [vereinzeltes in der Verein- 

- zelung]. 
Anxiety makes manifest in Dasein its Being towards its ownmost poten- 
tiality-for-Being—that is, its Being-free for the freedom of choosing, itself 
and taking-hold-ofitzelf. Anxiety brings Dasein face to face with its Being- 


Sree for (propensio in...) the authenticity « of its ts Being, and Fa 
Ber possibility which i sae But at the same jeme; this i 


1.6 Being and Time 233 
Being to which ‚Dasein. as Being-in-the-world | has been delivered over. 
which it is Ss anxious—namely, Being-in-the-world. d. The selfsameness of that 
in the face of which and that about which one has anxiety, extends even 
to anxiousness [Sichängsten] itself. For, as a , state-of-mind, anxiousness is- 
a basic kind of Bei ing-in-the-worid. Here the disclosure and the disclosed ar: 
existentially selfsame in such a way that in the latter the world has been disclosed 
as world, and Being-in has been disclosed as a potentiality-for-Being which is 
individualized, pure, and thrown; this makes it plain that with the phenomenon of 


anxiety a distinctive state-of-mind has become a theme for Interpretation. Anxiety 


individualizes Dasein and thus discloses it as ‘solus ipse’. But this existential 
‘solipsism’ is so far from the displacement of putting an isolated subject- 
Thing into the innocuous emptiness of a worldless occurring, that in an 
extreme sense what it does is precisely to bring Dasein face to face with its 
world as world, and thus bring it face to face with itself as Being-in-the- 
world. 

Again everyday discourse and the everyday interpretation of Dasein 
furnish our most unbiased evidence that anxiety as a basic state-of-mind 


is disclosive in the manner we have shown. As we have said earlier, a_ 


state-of-mind makes feo at wh In anxiety one feels ‘uncanny’. : 


Here’the peculiar indefiniteness of that which Dasein finds 3 itself alongside 
in anxiety, comes proximally to expression: the “nothing and nowhere”. 

But here “uncanninéss” also means “not-being-at-home” [das Nicht- 
zuhause-sein]. In our first indication of the phenomenal character of 
Dasein’s basic state and in our clarification of the existential meaning of 
“Being-in” as distinguished from the categorial signification of ‘insideness’, 
Being-in was defined as “residing alongside . . .”, ‘““Being-familiar with 
. 4. This character of Being-in was then brought to view more concretely 
through the everyday publicness of the “they”, which brings tranquillized 
self-assurance—‘Being-at-home’, with all its obviousness—into the aver- 
age everydayness of Dasein.'!! On the other hand, as Dasein falls, anxiety 
pia it back fre from its s absorption in in ae ‘world’, Everyday a 


he-warld Id. Being-in enters info the existential we eaten ‘mode’ a ne. 
Nothing z else is meant by our talk about ‘uncanniness’. 


By this time we can see phenomenally w ing, as fleeing, flees in 
the face of. It does not flee in the face of entities within-the-world these are 
precisely ; what it flees s lowards—as entities e h our concern, 


1 ‘Befindlichkeit, so wurde früher gesagt, macht offenbar, “wie einem ist”. In der Angst 
ist einem “unheimlich”. The reference i is presumably to H. 194 above. While ‘unheimlich’ is 
here translated as ‘uncanny’, it means more literally ‘unhomelike’, as the author proceeds 
to point out, 


189 


td 


234 Being and Time - 1.6 
lost in the thea can dwell in tranquillized jazailiarity. Me aie in falling 


See ee 


aT Dasein id Being- a On has been delivered over 
to itself in its Being. This uncanniness pursues Dasein constantly, and is a 
threat toits everyday lostness in the “they”, though not explicitly. This 
threat can go together factically with en. assurance and self- 
sufficiency in one’s everyday concern. Anxiety can arise in the most 
innocuous Situations. Nor does it have any need for darkness, in which it 
is Commonly easier for one to feel uncanny. In the dark there is emphatic- 
ally ‘nothing’ to see, though the very world itself is still ‘there’, and ‘there’ 
more.obtrusively. 

If we Interpret Dasein’s uncanniness from an existential-ontological 
point of view as a threat which reaches Dasein itself and which comes 
from Dasein itself, we are rıot contending that in factical anxiety too it 
has always been understood in this sense. When Dasein “understai:ds” 
uncanniness in the everyday manner, it does so by turning . away from it 
in falling; in in this turning-away, the “ not-at-home” gets ‘dimmed down’. 
Yet the everydayness of this tai het phenomenally that anxiety, as 
a hasic state-of-mind, belongs to Dasein’s essential 1 state of Being-in-the- 


world, which, as one that is existential, is never present-ai-hand but is 
itself al always in a mode of factical Being-there!—that is, in the mode of 
a state-ci-mind. That kird-of Being-in-the-world which is. tranquiilized 
and familiaris a mode of Dzsein’s uncanniness, not the reverse. From an 
existentiil-ontoingical poini of view, the “not-at-homie” must be conceived as the more 
primoraial phenomenon, 

such Zein -in-the-world, as Being which is 2 the world’ and which 
is concernful_in its state-of-mind, ever be aid. Fear is is | alixiety, | fallen 
into, the ‘world’, inauthentic, and, as such, hidden from itself. 

190 After all, the mood of uncanniness remains, factically, something for 
which we mostly have no existentiell understanding. Moreover, under the 
ascendancy of _ falling and _publicness, ‘real’ anxiety is rare. Anxiety 
is ee physiological’ factors. This fact, in its facticity, is 
a problem ontologically, not merely with regard to its ontical causation and ° 
course of development. Only because Dasein is anxious in the very depths 
of its Being, does it become possible for anxiety to be elicited physio- : 
logically. . ‘ 

Even rarer than the existentiell Fact of “real” anxiety are attempts to " 


1 Here we follow the earlier editions in reading ‘Da-teins’, In the later editions the 
hyphen appears ambiguously at the end of a line. 


I. 6 Bang and Time 235 


Interpret this phenomenon according to the principles of its existential- 
` ontological Constitution and function. The reasons for this lic partly in 
' the general neglect of the existential analytic of Dasein, but more parti- 
cularly in a failure to recognize the phenomenon of state-of-mind!Y. Yet 
the factical rarity of anxiety as a phenomenon cannot deprive it of its 
fitness to take over a methodological function in principle for the existential 
analytic. On the contrary, the rarity of the phenomenon is an index that 
Dasein, which for the most part remains concealed from itself in its 
authenticity because of the way in which things have been publicly inter- 
preted by the “they”, becomes disclosable in a primordial sense in this 
basic state-of-mind. 

Of course it is essential to every state-of-mind that in each case Being- 
in-the-world should be fully disclosed in all those items which are con- 
stitutive for it—world, Being-in, Self. But in anxiety there lies the pos- 
sibility of a disclosure which is quite distinctive; for anxiety individualizes. 
This individualization brings Dasein back from its s falling, and makes 
manifest to it that t authenticity and | inauthenticity are possibilities ı of i its 
Being. These basic possibilities of Dasein (and Däsein is in each case 
mine) show themselves in anxiety as they are in themselves—-undisguised 
by entities within-the-world, to which, proximally and for the most part, 
Dasein clings. 

How far has this existential Interpretction of anxiety arrived at a 
phenomenal basis for answering the guiding question of the Being of the 
tetality of Dascin’s structural whole? 


T zr. Dasein’s Being as Care 


Since our aim is to grasp the totality of this structural whole onto- 
logically, we must first ask whether the phenomenon of anxiety and that 
which is disclosed in it, can give us the whole of Dasein in a way which is 
phenomenally eguiprimordial, and whether they can do so in such a 
manner that if we look searchingly at this totality, our view of it will be 
filled in by what has thus been given us. The entire stock of what lies 
therein may be counted up formally and recorded: anxi ess as a state- 
of-mind js a w -in-the-world; that in the face of which we have 


anxiet is thrown Being-in-the-world; that which we have anxiety about 
is our er een ery sli sche cine E of 
anxicly shows Dasein as factically existing Bein eing-ip-the-world. The funda- 
mental ontological characteristics of this entity are existentiality, facticity, 
and Being-fallen, These existential characteristics are not pieces belonging 


.to something composite, one of which might sometimes be missing; but 
there is woven together in them a primordial context which makes up 


191 


Rint 


192 


236 Being and Time 1.6 
that totality of the structural whole which we are seeking. In the unity , 
of those characteristics of Dasein’s Being which we have mentioned, this 
Being becomes something which it is possible for us to grasp as such 
ontologically. How is this unity itself to be characterized ? 

Dasein is an entity for which, in its Being, that Being is an issue. The 
phrase ‘is an issue’ has been made plain in the state-of-Being of under- 
standing—of understanding as self-projective Being towards its ownmost 
potentiality-for-Being. This potentiality is that for the sake of which any 
Dasein is as itis. In each case Dasein has already compared itself, in its 
Being, with a possibility of itself. eo for one’s ee he 


we 
nr 
— mn 


But E alegea Bei ing award one? ownt potentiality for Being 


means that i ih each case Daseitris already ahead of itself [ihm hm selbst . 
vorweg] i ing : Dasein is always ‘ beyond itself” Mm über sich hinaus”], 


mn nn, 
Se — 


Being tov towards tl thé potentiality-for-Being which it is sc This structure 
i gs to the essential ‘is ari issue’, we ‘shall denote 
| cna 


Se 


But this structure pertains to the whole of Dasein’s constitution. “Being- 
ahead-of-itself”’ does not signify anything like an isolated tendency in a 
worldless ‘subject’, but characterizes Being-in-the-world. To Being-in-the- 
world, however, belongs the fact that it has been delivered over to itself— 
that it has in each case already been thrown info a world. The abandonment 
of Dasein to itself is shown with primordial concreteness in anxiety. 
“Being-ahead-of-itself” means, if we grasp it more fully, “ahead-ofitself- 


in-already-being-in-g-world’”’, As soon as this essentially unitary structure is 


seen as a phenomenon, what we have set forth earlier in our analysis of 
worldhood also becomes plain. The upshot of that analysis was that the 
referential totality of significance (which as such is constitutive for world- 
hood) has been ‘tied up’ with a ‘‘for-the-sake-of-which’’. The fact that this 
referential totality of the manifold relations of the ‘in-order-to’ has been 
bound up with that which is an issue for Dasein, does not signify that a 
‘world’ of Objects which is present-at-hand has been welded together with 
a subject. It is rather the phenomenal expression of the fact that the con- 


stifution of Dasein,- whose totality isnew_brought out explicitly as ahead- 
of-itself-in-Being-already-in . Se FRE To put it other- 


wise, existi? tiality is essentially determined b 
facticity. i 

"Furthermore, Dasein’ l's factical existing is not only generally and without 
further differentiation a thrown potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world ¡itis 


I. 6 Being and Time 237 


d of its concern. In this falling Being- 
alongside . - ., fleeing in the face of uncanniness (which for the most part 
remains concealed with latent anxiety, since the publicness of the “they” 

suppresses everything. unfamiliar), announces itself, whether it does so 
explicitly or nots and whether. it i is understood. ‚or-not.-Ahead-ofitseli- 


Being alongside pana eg Pp eee with which 
one concerns oneself. | De 

~~ The formally existential totality of Dasein’s ontological structural whole 
must therefore be grasped in the following structure: the Being of Dasein 
means. ahead-of-itself-Being-alı ready-in-(the- -world) as Being-alongside 


tion of the 1 term “care” [Sorge], which is us is used in a purely o ontologico- 
existential manner. From this signification every ter tendency of Being which 
one might have in mind ontically, such a as worry [Besorgnis] or carefreeness 
[Sorglosigkeit],.. is ruled out. 
Because Being-in-the-world. is essentially care, Being-alongeide the 
ready-to-hand could.be taken in our previous analyses as concem, and 


Being with the Dasein-with of Others as we encounter it within-the- 


world could be taken as solicitude.! Being-alongside something is concern, 


because it is defined as a way of Being-in by its basic structure— care. 
Care d does not characterize just existentiality, let us say, as detached from 
in which Being may be characterized. So neither does ‘ “care”? stand 
primarily and exclusively for an isolated_attitude_of the “I” tow: ap towards 
itself. If one were to construct the expression ‘care for oneself’ self’ ["“Selbst- 
sorge”], following the analogy of “concern” [Besorgen] and “solicitude” 
[Fürsorge], this would be a tautology. “Care” cannot stand for some 
special attitude towards the Self; for the Self has already been character- 
ized ontologically by ‘‘Being-ahead-of-itself’’, a characteristic in which the 
other two items in the structure of care—Being-already-in ... and Being- 
alongside . . .—have been jointly posited [mitgesetzt]. 

In ‘Being-ahead-of-oneself as Being towards one’s ownmost potentiality- 
for- „Being, lies the a on for the : possibility of 


es 


= can cor comport itself aan its Zu even unwilling! iy; it can 
be inauthentically; and factically it is inauthentically, proximally and for 
the most part. The authentic “for-the-sake-of-which” has not been taken 


1 Cf. H. 121 and 131 above. 


193 


194 


238 Being and Time i. 6 
oe of; the projection of ones own potentiality-for-Being has been 


stamma. m m, 


ahead: -of-itself”’, the ‘itself? which ` ich we have in mind i is ‚in each case. the Self 


u... 


inthe sense of the they-self. Even in in_inauthenticity Dasein remains 


ran en —— a 


essentially ahead of itself, just as Dasein’ n’s fleeing in the face of itself as it 
falls;’ still shows tl s that it it has the state-of-Being o of an entity for which tts 
Being ts an issue. —S 

Care, as a primordial structural totality, lies‘before’ [“‘vor”’] every 
factical ‘attitude’ and ‘situation’ of Dasein, and it does so existentially a 
priori; this means that it always lies in them. So this phenomenon by no 
means expresses a priority of the ‘practical’ attitude over the theoretical. 
When we ascertain something present-at-hand by merely beholding it, 
this activity has the character of care just as much as does a ‘political 
action’ or taking a rest and enjoying oneself. ‘Theory’ and ‘practice’ are 
possibilities of Being for an entity whose Being must be defined as “care”. 

The phenomenon of care in its totality is essentially something that 
cannot be torn asunder; so any attempts to trace it it back to special acts 
or drives like willing and | wishing or urge and. addiction,’ or to construct 


un — mm ee  ~ 


it out of these, will be unsuccessful. 


EB —e mo 


Milling and wishing are rooted with ontological necessity in Dasein as 
_ wishin 


care; they are not just ontologically undifferentiated Experiences occur- 
ring in a ‘stream’ which is completely indefinite with regard to the 
meaning of its Being. This is no less the case with_urge and addiction. 
These too are grounded in care so far as they can be exhibited in Dasein 
at all. This does not prevent them from being ontologically constitutive 
even for entities that merely ‘live’. But the basic ontological state of ‘living’ 
is a problem in its own right and can be tackled only reductively and 
privatively in terms of the ontology of Dasein. 

Care is ontologically ‘earlier’ than the phenomena we have just 
mentioned, which admittedly can, within certam limits, always be 
‘described’ appropriately without our needing to have the full ontological 
horizon visible, or even to be familiar with it at all. From the standpoint 
of our present investigation in fundamental ontology, which aspires 
neither to a thematically complete ontology of Dasein nor even to a 
concrete anthropology, it must suffice to suggest how these phenomena 
are grounded existentially in care. 

That very potentialit -for-Being for the sake of whieh-Dasein is, has 
Being-in. eing. Thus it implies ontologically a 
relation to entities within-the-world. Care is always concern an and solicitude, 


... besondere Akte oder Triebe wie Wollen und Wünschen oder Drang und Hang... 
cr. H 182. 


I. 6 ing and Time 239 
even if only privatively_I , an entity which is understood—that is, 
one which has been projected upon its possibility—gets seized upon, 
either as something with which one may concern oneself, or as something 


\ which is to be brought into its Being tir:ough solicitude. Hence, to any 


‚ıllıng there belongs something willed -vhich has already made itself 
ve‘. ste in terms of a ‘‘for-the-sake-of which’. If willing is to be possibl«: 
1..ologically, the following items are cunstitutive for it: (1) the prior 
isclosedness of the “for-the-sake-of-which” in general (Being-ahead-of- 
itself); (2) the disclosedness of something with which one can concern 
oneself (the world as the “wherein” of Being-already); (3) Dasein’s 
Fan of itself understandingly upon a potentiality-for-Being towards 


possibility of the entity ‘willed’. In the phenomenon of willing, the under- 
ying totality of care shows through. 


Sem = ee anes ru 


anaa aaa 


this world: it Tagen a and it ; does so first iz in ackbrdenee wath 
the way.things have been interpreted by the ‘ “they”. 1 This interpretation 
has already restricted the. possible options of choice to what | lies within 
the range of the that wi which is 


fitting and _proper.. This sering off of Dasein’ s posibiiges t to what i is 


possible as. such. The average. ceerlaynen of concer a blind to 


Se eee 


This tranquillizing does not ı rule | out a out a high degree < of diligence it in one’s 
concern, but arouses it. In this case no positive new possibilities are willed, 
but that which is at one’s disposal becoines ‘tactically’ altered in such a 
way that there is a semblance of something happening. 

All the same, this tranquillized ‘willing’ under the guidance of the 
“they”, does not-signify that one’s Being towards one’s potentiality-for- 


u Zur 


‚ Being has-been extinguished, but only that it has been modified. In such 


a case, one’s Being towards possibilities shows itself for the most part as 
mere wishing. In the wish Dasein projects its Being upon possibilities which 


not only have not been taken hold of in concern, but whose fulfilment has 
| not even been pondered over and expected. On the contrary, in the mode 
: of mere wishing, the ascendancy of Being-ahead-of-oneself brings with it 
‚a lack of understanding for the factical possibilities, When the world has 


‘been primarily projected as a wish-world, Being-in-the-world has lost 
‘itself inertly i in what is at its disposal; but it has done so in such a way 
‘that, in the light of what is wished for, that which is at its disposal (and 
‘a is all that is ready-to-hand) is never enough. Wishing is an existential 


1°, ,, (Welt als das Worin des Schon-seins) .. .’ 


196 


240 Being and Time I. 6 
modification of projecting oneself understandingly, when such self- 


projection has fallen forfeit to thrownness and just keeps s hankering after. 
possibilities. 1 Such hankering | closes off the Lange what i is ‘there’ in 


presupposes care. 


In hankering,, Being-already-alongside . „takes priority. The “ahead- 
of-itself-in-Being-already-in . . .” is correspondingly modified. Dasein’s 


— ae ete 


„hankering as it. s it falls r makes manifest its addiction to becoming ` ‘lived’ by 


whatever world it is in. This addiction. shows the.character of Being out 


for something [Ausseins auf. . .]. Being-ahead-of-oneself has lost itsel itself in 
a „just-always-already-alongside’. What one is addicted ‘towards’ [Das 
“Hin-zu” des Hanges] is tc^ et oneself be drawn by the sort of thing for 
which the addiction hankers. If Dasein, as it were, sinks into an addiction 
then there is not merely an addiction present-at-hand, but the entire 
structure of care has been modified. Dasein has become blind, and puts 
all possibilities into the service of the addiction. 


On the other hand, the urge ‘ta live’ is gomething-‘towards’ which one 


is impelled, and it brings the impulsion along with it of its own accord. . 


It is ‘towards this at any price’. The urge seeks to crowd aut [verdrängen] 
other possibilities. Here too the_ Being-ahead-of-o onese at ıs 


inauthentic, even if one is assailed by an urge coming from the very thing 
that is s urging one on. The urge can outrun one’s current state-of-mind 
and one’s understanding. But then Dasein is not—and never is—a ‘mere 


nn mn 


urge’ to which other kinds of contro ntrölling or guiding behaviour are added 
from time to time; rather, as a modification of the entirety of Being-in- 
the-w it is always-care already, 

T Se care has not yet become free, though care first makes it 
ontologically possible for Dasein to be urged on by itself.* In addiction, 
however, care has always been bound. Addiction and urge are possibilities 
rooted in the thrownness of Dasein. The urge ‘to live’ is not to be annihi- 
lated; the addiction to becoming ‘lived’ by the world is not to be rooted 
out. But because these are both grounded ontologically in care, and only 
because of this, they are both to be modified in an ontical and existentiell 
manner by care—by care as something authentic. 

With the expression ‘care’ we have in mind a basic existential-onto- 
ssi phenomenon, which all the same is not simple in its structure. The 


. das, der Geworfenheit verfallen, den Möglichkeiten un noch nachkhängt.’ 
2 in ein “Nur-immer-schon-bei . ’ Here we follow the oe of the’ later 
editions. The earlier editions have ‘ “Nur-immer-schon-sein-bei . ”+ (‘just-always- 
rue De E 
agegen ist der Drang ‘‘zu leben” ein “‘Hin-zu’’, das von ihm selbst her den Antrieb 
en The italicization of ‘Drang’ appears only in the later editions. 
. das Bedrängtsein des Daseins aus ihm selbst her . 


I. 6 | Being and Time 241 
ontologically elemental totality of the care-structure cannot be traced 
back to some ontical ‘primal element’, just as Being certainly cannot be 
‘explained’ in terms of entities. In the end it will be shown that the idea 
of Being in general is just as far from being ‘simple’ as is the Being of 
Dasein, In defining ‘‘care” as “Being-ahead-of-onesclf—in in-Being-already- 
in... .—as Being-alongside . . .”, we have made it plain that even this 
phenomenon is, in itself, still structurally grticulated. But is this not a 
phenomenal symptom that we must pursue the ontological question even 
further until we can exhibit a still more primordial phenomenon which 
provides the ontological support for the unity and the totality of the 
structural manifoldness of care? Before we follow up this question, we 
must look back and appropriate with greater precision what we have 
_ hitherto Interpreted in aiming at the question of fundamental ontology 
as to the meaning of Being in general. First, however, we must show that 
what is ontologically ‘new’ in this Interpretation is ontically) quite old. 
In explicating Dasein’s Being as care, we are not forcing it under an idea 
of our own contriving, but we are conceptualizing existentially what has 
already been disclosed in an ontico-existentiell manner. 


{ 42. Confirmation of the Existential Interpretation of Dasein as Care in terms of 
Dasein’s Pre-ontological Way of Interpreting Itself* 

In our foregoing Interpretations, which have finally led to exhibiting 
care as the Being of Dasein, everything depended on our arriving at the 
right ontological foundations for that entity which in each case we ourselves 
are, and which we call ‘man’. To do this it was necessary from the outset 
to change the direction of our analysis from the approach presented by the 
traditional definition of “man”—an approach which has not been 
clarified ontologically and is in principle questionable. In comparison 
with this definition, the cxistential-ontological interpretation may seem 
strange, especially if ‘care’ is understood just ontically as ‘worry’ or ‘grief’ 
[als ‘‘Besorgnis” und “Bekümmernis”], Accordingly we shall now cite a 
document which is pre-ontological in character, even though its demon- 
strative force is ‘merely historical’. 

We must bear in mind, however, that in this document Dasein is expres- 
sing itself ‘ primordially’, unaffected by any theoretical Interpretation and 
without aiming to propose any. We must also note that Dasein’s Being is 
characterized by historicality, though this must first be demonstrated 
ontologically. Zf Dasein is ‘historical’ in the very depths of its Being, then 
a deposition [Aussage] which comes from its history and goes back to it, 


1'Die u der existenzialen Interpretation des Daseins als Sorge aus der vorontologischen 
Selbstauslegung des Daseins.’ 


197 


x 


242 Being and Time 1.6 


and which, moreover, is prior to any scientific knowledge, will have especial 
weight, even though its importance is never purely ontological. That 
understanding of Being whic! lies in Dasein: itself, expresses itself pre- 


entolneically. The document: zh we are atout to cite should make plain 
thet ovr existential Interp--i-.icn is not a n::re fabrication, but that as 
av: logical ‘construction . :s well grow dsd and has been sketched 


est i.csovehand in elementa? ways. 
Tibor- is an ancient fable in which Daseu:’s interpretation of itse:) a‘ 
‘care’ bis been embedded: v 


Cura cum fluvium trousiret, vidit cretosum lutum 
- sustulttque cogiiabundu atque coepit fingere. 
dum deliberat quid iam fecisset, Jovis intervenit. 
rogat eum Cura 4: de: illi spiritum, et facile impetrat. 
cut cum vellet Cura nomen ex sese ipsa imponere, 
Jovis prohibuit suumque nomen ei dandum esse dictitat. 
dum Cura et Jovis disceptant, Tellus surrexit simul 
suumque nomen esse volt cut corpus praebuerit suum. 
sumpseruni Saturnum iudicem, 1s sic aecus iudicat : 
‘tu Jovis quia spiritum dedisti, in morte spiritum, 
tuque Tellus, quia dedisti corpus, corpus recipito, 
Cura eum quia prima finxit, teneat quamdiu vixerit. 
sed quae nunc de nomine eius vobis controversia est, 
homo vocetur, quia videtur esse facius ex humo.’ 


‘Once when ‘Care’ was crossing a river, she saw some clay; she thought- 
fully took up a piece and began to shape it. While she was meditating en 
what she had made, Jupiter came by. ‘Care’ asked him to give it spirit, 
and this he gladly granted. But when she wanted her name to be bestowed 
upon it, he forbade this, and demanded that it be given his name instead. 
While ‘Care’ and Jupiter were disputing, Earth arose and desired that 
her own name be conferred on the creature, since she had furnished it 
with part of her body. They asked Saturn to be their arbiter, and he made 
the following decision, which seemed a just one: ‘Since you, Jupiter, have 
given its spirit, you shall receive that spirit at its death; and since you, 
Earth, have given its body, you shall receive its body. But since ‘Care’ 
first shaped this creature, she shall possess it as long as it lives. And because 
there is now a dispute among you as to its name, let it be called ‘homo’, 
for it is made out of Aumus (earth).’! 


1 In both the earlier and later editions Heidegger has ‘videt’ in the first line of the Latin 
version of the fable, where Biicheler, from whom the text has been taken, has ‘vidit’; in 
the 12th line Heidegger has ‘enim’ where Bücheler has ‘eum’. The punctuation of the 
Latin version is as Bücheler gives it. The single quotation marks in the English translation 


\ 


| 


J 


1. 6 Being and Time 243 

This pre-ontological document becomes especially significant not only 
in that ‘care’ is here seen as that to which human Dasein belongs ‘for its 
lifetime’, but also because this priority of “care” emerges in connection 
with the familiar way of taking man as compounded of body (earth) and 
spirit. “Cura prima finxif’: in care this entity has the ‘source’ of its Being. 
“Cura teneat, quamdiu vixerit” ; the entity is not released from this source but 


Ce i or 
a tan eme ne te ah ree ve ee 


wre ma. 


Saturn, “Time’.v! Thus the pre-ontological characterization of man’s 
essence expressed in this fable, has brought to view in advance the kind 
of Being which dominates his temporal sojourn in the world, and does so 
through and through. 

The history of the signification of te ontical concept of ‘care’ permits 
us to see still further basic structures of Dasein. Burdach V!! calls attention 
to a double meaning of the term ‘cura’ according to which it signifies not 
only ‘anxious exertion’ but also ‘carefulness’ and ‘devotedness’ [‘‘Sorg- 


falt”, “Hingabe”]. Thug Seneca writes in his last epistle (Zp. 124): 


‘Among the four existent Natures (trees, beasts, man, and God), the latter 


Man’s perfectio—his transformation into that which he can be in Being- 
free for his ownmast possibilities (projection)—is ‘accomplished’ by ‘care’. 
But with equal primordiality ‘care’ determines what is basically specific 
in this entity, according to which it has been surrendered to the world 
of its concern (thrownness). In the ‘double meaning’ of ‘care’, what we 


thrown-projection..... 

As compared with this ontical interpretation, the existential-ontological 
Interpretation is not, let us say, merely an ontical generalization which is 
theoretical in character. That would just mean that ontically all man’s 
ways of behaving are ‘full of care’ and are guided by his ‘devotedness’ to 
correspond strictly to the double quotation marks in Heidegger’s version; some of these 
are not found in Burdach’s translation, which, except for two entirely trivial changes, 
Heidegger has otherwise reproduced very accurately. (On Bücheler and Burdach, see 


Heidegger’s note v, ad loc.) Our translation is a compromise between Burdach and the 
original Latin. 


199 


200 


244 Being and Time 1. 6 


something. The ‘generalization’ is rather one that is ontological and a 
priori. What it has in view is not a set:of ontical properties which con- 
stantly keep emerging, but a state of Being which is already underlying 
in every case, and which first makes it ontologically possible for this 
entity to be addressed ontically as “cura”’, The existential condition for the 
possibility of ‘the cares of life’ and ‘devotedness’, must be conceived as 
care, in a sense which is primordial—that is gniological 

TheMranscendental ‘generality’ of the phenomenon of care and of 
all fundamental existentialia is, on the other hand, broad enough to 
present a basis on which every interpretation of Dasein which is 
ontical and belongs to a world-view’ must move, whether Dasein is 
understood as affliction [Not] and the ‘cares of life’ or in an opposite 
manner. 

The very ‘emptiness’ and ‘generality’ which obtrude themselves 
ontically in existential structures, have an ontological definiteness and ' 
fulness of their own. Thus Dasein’s whoie constitution on itself i$ not sim le in 
its unity, but shows a structural J articulation; in t the > existential conception 
of care, this articulation becomes expressed. 

Thus, by our ontological’ Interpretation of Dasein, we have been 
brought to the existential conception of care from Dasein’s pre-ontological 
interpretation of itself as ‘care’. Yet the analytic of Dasein is not aimed at 
laying an ontological basis for anthropology; its purpose is one of funda- 
mental ontology. This is the purpose that has tacitly determined the 
course of our considerations hitherto, our selection of phenomena, and 
the limits to which our analysis may proceed. Now, however, with regard 
to our leading question of the meaning of Being and our way of working 
this out, our investigation must give us explicit assurance as to what we 
have so far achieved. But this sort of thing is not to be reached by super- 
ficially taking together what we have discussed. Rather, with the help of 
what we have achieved, that which could be indicated only crudely at 
the beginning of the existential analytic, must now be concentrated into 
a more penetrating understanding of the problem. 


€ 43. Dasein, Worldhood, and Reality - 

The question of the meaning of Being becomes possible at all only if 
there is something like an understanding of Being. Understanding of 
Being belongs to the kind of Being which the entity called “Dasein” 
possesses. The more appropriately and primordially we have succeeded 
in explicating this entity, the surer we are to attain our goal in the further 
course of working out the problem of fundamental ontology. 

In our pursuit of the tasks of a preparatory existential analytic of Dasein, 


1.6 Being and Time 245 


there emerged an Interpretation of understanding, meaning, and inter- 
pretation. Our analysis of Dasein’s disclosedness showed further that, with 
this disclosedness, Dasein, in its basic state of Being-in-the-world, has been 
revealed equiprimordially with regard to the world, Being-in, and the 
Self. Furthermore, in the factical disclosedness of the world, entities 
within-the-world are discovered too. This implies that the Being of these 
entities is always understood in a certain manner, even if it is not conceived 
in a way which is appropriately ontological. To be sure, the pre-onto- 
logical understanding of Being embraces all entities which are essentially 
disclosed in Dasein; but the understanding of Being has not yet Arti- 
culated itself im a way which corresponds to the various modes of Being. 

At the same time our interpretation of understanding has shown that, 
in accordance with its falling kind of Being, it has, proximally and for the 
most part, diverted itself [sich . . . verlegt] into an understanding of the 
‘world’, Even where the issue is not only one of ontical experience but 
also one of ontological understanding, the interpretation of Being takes its 
orieutation in the first instance from the Being of entities within-the- 
world. Thereby the Being of what is proximally ready-to-hand gets passed 
over, and entities are first conceived as a context of Things (res) which are 
present-at-hand. “‘Being’’ acquires the meaning of “Reality” ii Sub- 
stantiality becomes the basic characteristic of Being. Corresponding to this 
way in which the understanding of Being has been diverted, even the 
ontological understanding of Dasein moves into the horizon of this con- 
ception of Being. Like any other entity, Dasein too is present-at-hand as Real. 
In this way “Being in general” acquires the meaning of “Reality”. Accord- 
ingly the concept of Reality has a peculiar priority in the ontological 
problematic. By this priority the route to a genuine existential analytic 
of Dasein gets diverted, and so too does our very view of the Being of what 
is proximally ready-to-hand within-the-world. It finally forces the general 
problematic of Being into a direction that lies off the course. The other 
modes of Being become defined negatively and privatively with regard to 
Reality. 

Thus not only the analytic of Dasein but the working-out of the question 
of the meaning of Being in general must be turned away from a one-sided 
orientation with regard to Being in the sense of Reality. We must demon- 
strate that Realityis not only one kind of Being among others, but that onto- 
logically it has a definite connection in its foundations with Dasein, the 
world, and readiness-to-hand. To demonstrate this we must discuss in 
principle the problem of Reality, its conditions and its limits. 

Under the heading ‘problem of Reality’ various questions are clustered : 
(1) whether any entities which supposedly ‘transcend our consciousness’ 


201 


202 


246 Being and Time 1.6 


are at all; (2) whether this Reality of the ‘external worid’ can be adequately 
proved; (3) how far this entity, if it is Real, is to be known in its Being-in- 
itself; (4) what the meaning of this entity, Reality, signifies in general. 
‘The following discussion of the problem of Reality will treat three topics 
with regard to the question of fundamental ontology: (a) Reality as a 
problem of Being, and whether the ‘external world’ can be proved; (b) 
Reality as an ontological problem; (c) Reality and care. 


(a) Reality as a problem of Being, and whether the ‘External World’ can be 
Proved 


Of these questions about Reality, the one which comes first in order is 
the ontological question of what “Reality” signifies in general. But as 
long as a pure ontological problematic and methodology was lacking, 
this question (if it was explicitly formulated at all) was necessarily con- 
founded with a discussion of the ‘problem of the external world’; for the 
analysis of Reality is possible only on the basis of our having appropriate 
access to the Real. But it has long been held that the way to grasp the Real 
is by waat kind of knowing which is characterized by beholding {das 
anschauende Erkennen]. Such knowing ‘is’ as a way in which the soul— 
or consciousness—behaves. In so far as Reality has the character of 
something independent and “in itself”, the question of the meaning of 
“Reality” becomes linked with that of whether the Real can be inde- 
pendent ‘of consciousness’ or whether there can be a transcendence of 
consciousness into the ‘sphere’ of the Real. The possibility of an adequate 
ontological analysis of Reality depends upon how far that of which the P.eal 
is to be thus independent—how far that which is to be transcended!—has 
itself been clarified with regard to its Being. Only thus can even the kind 
of Being which belongs to transcendence be ontologically grasped. And 
finally we must make sure what kind of primary access we have to the 
Real, by deciding the question of whether knowing can take over this 
function at all. 

These investigations, which take precedence over any possible ontological 
question about Reality, have been carried out in the foregoing existential 
analytic. According to this analytic, knowing is a founded mode of access 
to the Real. The Real is essentially accessible only as entities within-the- 
‘world. All access to such entities is founded ontologically upon the basic 
state of Dasein, Being-in-the-world; and this in turn has care as its eves 
more primordial state of Being (ahead of itself—Being already in a world 
— as Being alongside entities within-the-world). 

The question of whether there is a world at all and whether its Being 


1',.. das, wovon Unabhängigkeit bestehen soll, was transzendiert werden soll. . .' 


I. 6 Being and Time 247 


can be proved, makes no sense if it is raised by Dasein as Being-in-the- 
world; and who else would raise it? Furthermore, it is encumbered with 
a double signification. The world as the “wherein” [das Worin] of Being- 
in, and the ‘world’ as entities within-the-world (that in which [das 
Wobei] one is concernfully absorbed) either have been confused or are 
not distinguished at all. But the world is disclosed es:entially along with the 
Being of Dasein; with the disclosedness of the world, the ‘world’ has in 
each case been discovered too. Of course entitics within-the-world in the 
sense of the Real as merely present-at-hand, are the very things that can 
remain concealed. But even the Real can be discovered only on the basis 
of 'a world which has already been disclosed. And only on this basis can 
anything Real still remain /idden. The question of the ‘Reality’ of the 
‘external world’ gets raised without any previous clarification of the 
phenomenon of the world as such. Factically, the ‘problem of the external 
world’ is constantly oriented with regard to entities within-the-world 
(Things and Objects). So these discussions c~-ift along into a problematic 
which it is almost impossible to disentangle ontologically. 

Kant’s ‘Refutation of Idealism’! shows how intricate these questions 
are and how what one wants to prove gets muddle' with what one does 
prove and with the means whereby the proof is carried out. Kant calls 
it ‘a scandal of philosophy and of human reason in general’ that there is 
still no cogent proof for the ‘Dasein of Things outside of us’ which will do 
away with any scepticism. He proposes such a proof himself, and indeed 


he does so to provide grounds for his ‘theorem’ that “The mere conscious- . 


ness of my own Dasein—a consciousness which, however, is empirical in 
character—proves the Dasein of objects in the space outside of me.’™4 

We must in the first instance note explicitly that Kant uses the term 
‘Dasein’ to designate that kind of Being which in the present investigation 
we have called ‘presence-at-hand’. ‘Consciousness of my Dasein’ means 
for Kant a consciousness of my Being-present-at-hand in the sense of 
Descartes. When Kant uses the term ‘Dasein’ he has in mind the Being- 
present-at-hand of consciousness just as much as the Being-present-at- 
hand of Things. 

The proof for the “Dasein of Things outside of me’ is supported by the 
fact that both change and performance belong, with equal primordia ity, 
to the essence of time. My own Being-present-at-hand—that is, the 
Being-present-at-hand of a multiplicity of representations, which has been 
given in the inner sense—is a process of change which is present-at-hand. 
To have a determinate temporal character [Zeitbestimmtheit], however, 
presupposes something present-at-hand which is permanent. But this 
cannot be ‘in us’, ‘for only through what is thus permanent can my 


203 


248 Being and Time 1.6 


Masein in time be determined’.*#! Thus if changes which are present-at- 
Hand have been posited empirically ‘in me’, it is necessary that along with 
these something permanent which is present-at-hand should be posited 
empirically ‘outside of me’. What is thus permanent is the condition which 
makes it possible for the changes ‘in me’ to be present-at-hand. The 
experience of the Being-in-time of representations posits something 
changing ‘in me’ and something permanent ‘outside of me’, and it posits 
both with equal primordiality. 

Of course this proof is not a causal inference and is therefore not 
encumbered with the disadvantages which that would imply. Kant gives, 
as it were, an ‘ontological proof” in terms of the idea of a temporal entity. 
it seems at first as if Kant has given up the Cartesian approach of positing 
= subject one can come across in isolation. But only in semblance. That 
Kant demands any proof at all for the ‘Dasein of Things outside of me’ 
shows already that he takes the subject—the ‘in me’—as the starting- 
point for this problematic. Moreover, his proof itself is then carried 
through by starting with the empirically given changes ‘tn me’. For only 
‘in me’ is ‘time’ experienced, and time carries the burden of the proof. 
Time provides the basis for leaping off into what is ‘outside of me’ in the 
course of the proof. Furthermore, Kant emphasizes that “The problem- 
atical kind [of idealism}, which merely alleges our inabuity to prove by 
irnmediate experience that there 1s a Dasein outside of our own, is reason- 
able and accords with a sound kind of philosophical thinking: namely, to 
permit no decisive judgment until an adequate proof has been found.”’ziii 

But even if the ontical priority of the isolated subject and inner exper- 
ience should be given up, Descartes’ position would still be retained 
entologically. What Kant proves—if we may suppose that his proof is 
correct and correctly based—is that entities which are changing and 
entities which are permanent are necessarily present-at-hand together. 
But when two things which are present-at-hand are thus put on the same 
ievel, this does not as yet mean that subject and Object are present-at- 
hand together. And even if this were proved, what is ontologically decisive 
would still be covered up—namely, the basic state of the ‘subject’, Dasein, 
as Being-in-the-world. The Being-present-at-hand-together of the physical and 
the psychical is completely different ontically and ontologically from the phenomenon 
of Being-in-the-world. 

Kant presupposes both the distinction between the ‘in me’ and the 
‘outside of me’, and also the connection between these; factically he is correct 
in doing so, but he is incorrect from the standpoint of the tendency of his 
proof. It has not been demonstrated that the sort of thing which gets 
established about the Being-present-at-hand-together of the changing and 


1.6 Being and Time 249 
the permanent when one takes time as one’s clue, will also apply to the 
connection between the ‘in me’ and the ‘outside of me’. But if one were 
to see the whole distinction between the ‘inside’ and the ‘outside’ and the 
whole connection between them which Kant’s proof presupposes, and if 


one were to have an ontological conception of what has been presupposed ` 


in this presupposition, then the possibility of holding that a proof of the 
‘Dasein of Things outside of me’ is a necessary one which has yet to be 
given [noch ausstehend], would collapse. 

The ‘scandal of philosophy’ is not that this proof has yet to be given, but 
that such proofs are expected and attempted again and again. Such expectations, 
aims, and demands arise from an ontologically inadequate way of sta: ting 
with something of such a characicr that independentty of ii and ‘outside’ 
of it a ‘world’ is to be proved as present-at-hand. it is not that the proofs 
are inadequate, but that the kind of Being of the er:tity which does the 
proving and makes requests for proofs has not been made definite enoxgn. This 
is why a demonstration that two things which are present-at-hauc are 
necessarily present-ai-hand tovether, can give rise to the Ulusion that 
something has been proved, or even can be proved, about Dastin as 
Being-in-the-worli. if Dasein is understood correctly, it denes such 
proofs, because, iu its Being, it already is what subsequent proots deem 
necessary to demenstrate for it. 

If one were to conclude that since the Being-present-at-hand of Things 
outside of us is impo:sibie to prove, it must therefore ‘be taken merely on 
faith =Y one would stijl fail to surmount this perversion of the problem. 
The assumption would remain tha: at bottom and ideaily it mast. still be 
possible to carry out such a proof. This inappropriate way of approaching 
the problem i« still endorsed when one restricts oneseli to a ‘faith 11: the 
Reality of the external world’, even if such a faith is explicitly ‘ackriw- 
ledged’ as such. Although one is not offering a stringent proof, one is 
still in principle demanding a proof and trying to satisfy that demand. 

Even if one should inveke the doctrine that the subject must presuppose 
and indeed always does unconsciously presuppose the presence-at-hand 
of the ‘external world’, one would still be starting with the construct of 
an isolated subject. The phenomenon of Being-in-the-world is something 
that one would no more meet in this way than one would by demon- 
strating that the physical and the psychical are present-at-hand together, 
With such presuppositions, Dasein always comes ‘too late’; for in so far 
as it does this presupposing as an entity (and otherwise this would be 
impossible), it is, as an entity, already in a world. ‘Earlier’ than any pre- 
supposition which Dasein makes, or any of its ways of behaving, is the 
‘a priori’ character of its state of Being as one whose kind of Being is care. 


20% 


206 


207 


250 Being and Time 1.6 

To have faith in the Reality of the ‘external world’, whether rightly or 
wrongly; to “‘prone” this Reality for it, whether adequately or inade- ! 
quately; to presuppose it; whether explicitly or not—attempts such as these 
which-have not mastered their own basis with full transparency, presuppose 


a subject «vbich is proximally worldless or unsure of its world, and which 
"must, at bottom, first assure itself ofa world. Thus from the very beginning, 


Being-in-a-world is disposed to “take things” in some way [Auffassen], to 
suppose, to be certain, to have faith—a way of behaving which itself is 
always a iounded mode of Being-in-the-world. 

The ‘n:oblem of Reality’ in the sense of the question whether an external 
world . .resent-at-hand and whether such a world can be proved, turns 
out to ..: an impossible one, not because its consequences lead to inextric- 


‘able impasses, but because the very entity which serves as its theme, is 


one which, ‘as it were, repudiates any such formulation of the question. 
Our task is not to prove that an ‘externa: world’ is present-at-hand or to 


_ show how it is present-at-hand, but to point out why Dasein, as Being-in- 
the-world, has the tendency to bury the ‘external world’ in nullity 
fepistemologically’ before going on to prove it.! The reason for this lies 


in Dasein’s falling and in the way in which the primary understanding of 
Being has been diverted to Being as presence-at-hand—a diversion which 
is motivated by that falling itself. If one formulates the question ‘critically’ 
with such an ontological orientation, then what one finds present-at- 
hand as proximally and solely certain, is something merely ‘inner’. After 
the primordial phenomenon of Being-in-the-world has been shattered, 
the isolated subject is all that remains, and this becomes the basis on which 
it gets joined together with a ‘world’. 

In this investigation we cannot discuss at length the many attempts to 
solve the ‘problem of Reality’ which have been developed in various 
kinds of realism and idealism and in positions which mediate between 
them. Certainly a grain of genuine inquiry is to be found in each of these; 
but certain as this is, it would be just as perverse if one should want to 
achieve a tenable solution of the problem by reckoning up how much 
has been correct in each case. What is needed rather is the basic insight 
that while the different epistemological directions which have been pur- 
sued have not gone so very far off epistemologically, their neglect of any 
existential analytic of Dasein has kept them from obtaining any basis for 
a well secured phenomenal problematic. Nor is such a basis to be obtained 
by subsequently making phenomenological corrections on the concepts of 
subject and consciousness. Such a procedure would give no guarantee 


1‘... warum das Dasein als In-der-Welt-sein die Tendenz hat, die “‘Aussenwelt” 
zunächst “erkenntnistheoretisch” in Nichtigkeit zu begraben um sie dann erst zu be- 
weisen.’ | 


I.6 Being and Time 251I 


that the inappropriate formulation of the yuestivn would not continue 
to stand. 

Along with Dastin as Being-in-tke-world, entities within-the-world 
have in each case already been disclosed. This existential-ontological 
asscrtion seems to accord with the thesis of realism that the externa! world 
is Really present-at-hand. In so far as this existential assertion does not 
deny ihat entitics within-the-world are present-at-hand, it agrees— 
doxographically, as it were—with the thesis of realism in its results, But 
it differs in principle from every kind of realism; for realism holds that 
the Reality of the ‘world’ not only needs to be proved but also is capable 
of proof. In the existential assertion both of these positions are directly 
negated. But what distinguishes this assertion from realisxa altogether, is 
the fact that in realism there is a lack of ontological understanding. 
Indecd realism tries to explain Reality ontically by Real connections of 
interaction between things that are Real. | 

As compared with realism, idealism, no matter how contrary and unten- 
able it may be in its results, has an advantage in principle, provided that 
it does not misunderstand itself as ‘psychological’ idealism. If idealism 
emphasizes that Being and Reality are only ‘in the consciousness’, this 
expresses an understanding of the fact that Being cannot be explained 
through entities. But as long as idealism fails to clarify what this very 
understanding of Being means ontologically, or how this understanding 
is possible, or that it belongs to Dasein’s state of Being, the Interpretation 
of Reality which idealism constructs is an empty one. Yet the fact that 
Being cannot be explained through entities and that Reality is possible 
only in the understanding of Being, does not absolve us from inquiring 
into the Being of consciousness, of the res cogitans itself. If the idealist 
thesis is to be followed consistently, the ontological analysis of conscious- 
ness itself is prescribed as an inevitable prior task. Only because Being is 
‘in the consciousness’—that is to say, only because it is understandable 
in Dasein—can Dasein also understand and conceptualize such character- 
istics of Being as independence, the ‘in-itself’, and Reality in general. 
Only because of this are ‘independent’ entities, as encountered within-the- 
world, accessible to circumspection. 

If what the term ““idealism” says, amounts to the understanding that 
Being can never be explained by entities but is already that which is 
‘transcendental’ for every entity, then idealism affords the only correct 
possibility for a philosophical problematic. If so, Aristotle was no less an 
idealist than Kant. But if “idealism” signifies tracing back every entity 
to a subject or consciousness whose sole distinguishing features are that 
it remains tndefinite im its Being and is best characterized negatively as 


20t 


252 Being and Time 1.6 


‘un-Thing-like’, then this idealism is no less naive in its method than the 
most grossly militant realism. 

It is still possible that one may give the problematic of Reality priority 
over any orientation in terms of ‘standpoints’ by maintaining the thesis 
that every subject is what it is only for an Object, and vice versa. But in 
this formal approach the terms thus correlated—like the correlation itself 
—remain ontologically indefinite. At the bottom, however, the whole 
correlation necessarily gets thought of as ‘somehow’ being, and must 
therefore be thought of with regard to some definite idea of Being. Of 
course, if the existential-ontological basis has been made secure beforehand 
by exhibiting Being-in-the-world, then this correlation is one that we can 
know later as a formalized relation, ontologically undifferentiated. 

Our discussion of the unexpressed presuppositions of attempts to solve 
the problem of Reality in ways which are just ‘epistemological’, shows 
that this problem must be taken back, as an ontological one, into the 
existential analytic of Dasein.*¥! 


(b) Reality as an Ontological Problem 


If the term “Reality” is meant to stand for the Being of entities present- 
at-hand within-the-world (res) (and nothing else is understood thereby), 
then when it comes to analysing this mode of Being, this signifies that 
entities within-the-world are ontologically conceivable only if the pheno- 
menon of within-the-world-ness has been clarified. But within-the-world- 
ness is based upon the phenomenon of the world, which, for its part, as an 
essential item in the structure of Being-in-the-world, belongs to the basic 
constitution of Dasein. Being-in-the-world, in turn, is bound up onto- 
logically in the structural totality of Dasein’s Being, and we have charac- 
terized care as such a totality. But in this way we have marked out the 
foundations and the horizons which must be clarified if an analysis of 
Reality is to be possible. Only in this connection, moreover, does the 
character of the “in-itself”’ become ontologically intelligible. By taking 
our orientation from this context of problems, we have in our earlier 
analyses Interpreted the Being of entities within-the-world.*vil 

To be sure, the Reality of the Real can be characterized phenomen- 
ologically within certain limits without any explicit existential-ontological 
basis. This is what Dilthey has attempted in the article mentioned above. 
He holds that the Real gets experienced in impulse and will, and that 
Reality is restsiance, or, more exactly, the character of resisting.! He then 
works out the phenomenon of resistance analytically. This is the positive 
contribution of his article, and provides the best concrete substantiation 


1 ‘Realität ist Widerstand, genauer Widerstéadigkeit.’ 


1. 6 Being and Time 253 


for his idea of a ‘psychology which both describes and dissects’. But he is 
kept from working out the analysis of this phenomenon correctly by the 
epistemological problematic of Reality. The ‘principle of phenomenality’ 
does not enable him to come to an ontological Interpretation of the Being 
of consciousness. ‘Within the same consciousness,’ he writes, ‘the will and 
its inhibition emérge.’=¥iii What kind of Being belongs to this ‘emerging’ ? 
What is the meaning of the Being of the ‘within’? What relationship-of- 
Being does consciousness bear to the Real itself? All this must be deter- 
mined ontologically. That this has not been done, depends ultimately on 
the fact that Dilthey has left ‘life’ standing in such a manner that it is 
ontologically undifferentiated; and of course ‘life’ is something which one 
cannot go back ‘behind’. But to Interpret Dasein ontologically does not 
signify that we must go back ontically to some other entity. The fact that 
Dilthey has been refuted epistemologically cannot prevent us from making 
fruitful use of what is positive in his analyses—the very thing that has not 
been understood in such refutations. 

Thus Scheler has recently taken up Dilthey’s Interpretation of Re- 
ality.xt He stands for a ‘voluntative theory of Dasein’. Here ‘‘Dasein” 
is understood in the Kantian sense 4s Being-present-at-hand. The ‘Being 
of objects is given immediately only in the way it is related to drive and 
will’. Scheler not only emphasizes, as does Dilthey, that Reality is never 
primarily given in thinking and apprehending; he also points out parti- 
cularly that cognition [Erkennen] itself is not judgment, and that knowing 
[Wissen] is a ‘relationship of Being’. 

What we have already said about the ontological indefiniteness of 
Dilthey’s foundations holds in principle for this theory too. Nor can the 
fundamental ontological analysis of ‘life’ be slipped in afterwards as a 
substructure. Such a fundamental analysis provides the supporting condi- 
tions for the analysis of Reality—for the entire explication of the character 
of resisting and its phenomenal presuppositions. Resistance is encoun- 
tered in a not-coming-through, and it is encountered as a hindrance to 
willing to come through. With such willing, however, something must 
already have been disclosed which one’s drive and one’s will are cut for. 
But what they are out for is ontically indefinite, and th’s indc.initeness 
must not be overlooked ontologically or taken as if it were nothing. When 
Being-out-for-something comes up against resistance, and can do raining 
but ‘come up against it’, it is itself already alongside a totality of involve- 
ments. But the fact that this totality has been discovered is grounied in 
the disclosedness of the referential totality of significance. The expertencing 
of resistance—that is, the discovery of what 1s resisiant to one’s endeavours—is pos- 
sible ontologically only by reason of the disclosedness of the world. The characic: 


210 


254 Being and Time T. 6 
of resisting is one that belongs to entities with-the-world. Factically, 
experiences of resistance determine only the extent and the direction in 
which entities encountered within-the-world are discovered. The sum- 
mation of such experiences does not introduce the disclosure of the world 
for the first time, but presupposes it. The ‘against’ and the ‘counter to’ 
as ontological possibilities, are supported by disclosed gies Bema ade 
Nor is resistance experienced in a drive or will which ‘emerges’ in its 
own right. These both turn out to be modifications of care. Only entities 
with this kind of Being can come up against something resistant as some- 
thing within-the-world, So if “Reality” gets defined as “the character of 
resisting”, we must notice two things: first, that this is only one character 
of Reality among others; second, that the character of resisting presup- 
poses necessarily a world which has already been disclosed. Resistance 
characterizes the ‘external world’ in the sense of entities within-the-world, 
but never in the sense of the worid itself. ‘Consciousness of Reality’ is itself 
a way of Being-in-the-world. Every ‘problematic of the external world’ comes 
back necessarily to this basic existential phenomenon. | 
If the ‘cogito sum’ is to serve as the point of departure for the existentia! 
analytic of Dasein, thea it needs to be turned around, and furthermore its 
content needs new ontclogico-phenomenal confirmation. The ‘sum’ is then 
asserted first, and indeed in the sense that “I am in a world”. As such an 
entity, “I am’ in the possibility of Being to vards various ways of comporting 
mysel&—namely, cogitationes—as ways ot > cing alongside entities within- 
the-world. Descartes, on the contrary, says that cogitationes are present-at- 
hand, and that in these ar. zgo is present-at-hand too as a worldless res 
cogitans. 


a 


(c) Reality and Cere 


“Reality”, as an ontological term, is one which we have related to 
entitics within-the-world. If it serves to designate this kind of Being in 
general, then readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand function as modes 
of Reality. If, however, one lets this world have its traditional signification, 
then it stands for Being in the sense of the pure presence-at-hand of 
Things. But not all presence-at-hand is the presence-at-hand of Things. 
The ‘Nature’ by which we are ‘surrounded’ is, of course, an entity within- 
the-world; but tne kind of Being which it shows belongs neither to the 
ready-to-hand nor to what is present-at-hand as ‘Things of Nature’. No 
matter how this Being af ‘Nature’ may be Interpreted, all the modes of 
Being of entities within-the-world are founded ontologically upon the 
worldhood of the world, and accordingly upon the phenomenon of Being- 
in-ihe world. From this there arises the insight that among the modes of 


1.6 Being and Time 255 
Being of entities within-the-world, Reality has no priority, and that 
Reality is a kind of Being which cannot even characterize anything like 
the world or Dasein in a way which is ontologically appropriate. 

In the order of the ways in which things are connected in their onto- 
logical foundations and in the order of any possible categorial and 
existential demonstration, Reality is referred back to the phenomenon of care. 
But the fact that Reality is ontologically grounded in the Being of Dasein, 
does not signify that only when Dasein exists and as long as Dasein exists, 
can the Real be as that which in itself it is. 

Of course only as long as Dasein is (that is, only as long as an under- 
standing of Being is ontically possible), ‘is there’ Being.! When Dasein 
does not exist, ‘independerce’ ‘is’ not either, nor ‘is’ the ‘in-itself”. In 


such a case this sort of thing can be neither understood nor not under- 


stocd, In such a case even eniities within-the-world can neither be dis- 
covered ner ‘ie hiaden. In sech a case it cannot he said that entitigs are, 
nor can it be said that they arc not. But now, as long: as there is an under- 
standing of Being and tnerefcre an understanding oi presence-at-hand, 
it can indeed be said that in this case entities will stili continue to be. 

As we have nated, Being {not entities; 1s dependent upon the under- 
stancing of Being; that is to sav, Reality (not the Real} is dependent upon 
care. By chis dependency our further analytic of Dasein is held secure in 
the face of an uncritical Inierpretation which nevertheless keeps urging 
itself apon us—an Interpretalion in which the idea of Reality is taken as 
the clue to Dasein. Only if we take our orientation from existentiality a: 
Interpreted in an ontologically positive manner, can we have any guar- 
antee that in the factical course of the analysis of ‘consciousness’ or of 
life’, some sense of ‘‘Reality” does not get made basic, even if it is one 
which has not been further differentiated. 

Entities with Dasein’s kind of Being cannot be conceived in terms of 
Reality and substantiality; we have expressed this by the thesis that tie 
substance of man is existence. Yet if we have Interpreted existentiality as care, 
and distinguished this from Realiry, this does not signify that our exist- 
ential analytic is at an end; we have merely allowed the intricate problems 
of the question of Being and its possible modes, and the question of the 
meaning of such modifications, to emerge more sharply: only if the under- 
standing of Being ts, do entities as entities become accessible; only if 

1° .. “gibt es” Sein.’ In his letter Uber den Humanismus (Klostermann, Frankfurt 
A. M., n.d., p. P ee Wahrheit, Francke A.G., Bern, 1947), 
Hei insists that, the ‘es gibt’ is here used deliberately, and should be 
taken terally as ‘it gives’. writes: ‘For the “it” which here “gives” is Being itself. 
The “gives”, however, designates the essence of Being, which gives and which ee 


truth.’ He adds that the ‘es gibt’ is used to avoid writing thet “Being is’, for the verb ‘:: 
is appropriate to entities but not to Being itself. 


212 


213 


256 Being and Time 1.6 


entities are of Dasein’s kind of Being is the understanding of Being pos- 
sible as an entity. 


T 44. Dasein, Disclosedness, and Truth 


From time immemorial, philosophy has associated truth and Being. 
Parmenides was the first to discover the Being of entities, and he ‘ident- 
ified’ Being with the perceptive understanding of Being: ro yàp adro voety 
doriy re kal elvai.*x Aristotle, in outlining the history of how the apyai have 
been uncovered ,**! emphasizes that the philosophers before him, under the 
guidance of ‘the things themselves’ have been compelled to inquire 
further: adré rò mpäypa wöonoingev adrots Kal ouvnydyxace Inreiv. Xi 
He is describing thesame fact when he says that dvayxal dpevos 5’axoAovubety 
rois gawopevors**lil_that he (Parmenides) was compelled to follow 
that which showed itself in itself. In another passage he remarks that these 
thinkers carried on their researches dm’ adrijs tis dAnbelas dvaypKa- 
UdsuevoiXXI¥—“compelled by the ‘truth’ itself”. Aristotle describes these 
researches as diAooogdeiv mepi ris dAnbeias*®V—" ‘philosophizing’ about 
the ‘truth’ ”—or even as drogaiveo9a: mepi rijs aAnGeias**¥1—as exhibit- 
ing something and letting it be seen with regard to the ‘truth’ 
and within the range of the ‘truth’. Philosophy itself is defined as dmornun 
ns aAnbeias™*vVil—“‘the science of the ‘truth’ ”. But it is also char- 
acterized as d&mioryun, 7 Oewpet rò Sv j õi as “a science which con- 
templates entities as entities” —that is, with regard to their Being. 

What is signified here by ‘carrying on researches into the “truth” ’, 
by “science of the ‘truth’ ” ? In such researches is ‘truth’ made a theme as 
it would be in a theory of knowledge or of judgment? Manifestly not, for 
‘truth’ signifies the same as ‘thing’ [‘‘Sache’’], ‘something that shows 
itself’. But what then does the expression ‘truth’ signify if it can be used 
as a term for ‘entity’ and ‘Being’? 

If, however, truth rightfully has a primordial connection with Being, 
then the phenomenon of truth comes within the range of the problem- 
atic of fundamental ontology. In that case, must not this phenomenon 
have been encountered already within our preparatory fundamental 
analysis, the analytic of Dasein? What ontico-ontological connection 
does ‘truth’ have with Dasein and with that ontical characteristic of 
Dasein which we call the ‘‘understanding of Being” ? Can the reason why 
Being necessarily goes together with truth and vice versa be pointed out 
in terms of such understanding ? 

These questions are not to be evaded. Because Being does indeed ‘go 
together’ with truth, the phenomenon of truth has already been one of the 
themes of our earlier analyses, though not explicitly under this title. In 


I, 6 Being and Time 257 


giving precision to the problem of Being, it is now time to delimit the 
phenomenon of truth explicitly and to fix the problems which it comprises. 
In doing this, we should not just take together what we have previously 
taken apart. Our investigation requires a new approach. 

Our analysis takes its departure from the traditional conception of truth, 
and attempts to lay bare the ontological foundations of that conception 
(a). In terms of these foundations the primordial phenomenon of truth 
becomes visible. We can then exhibit the way in which the traditional 
conception of truth has been derived from this phenomenon (b). Our 
investigation will make it plain that to the question of the ‘essence’ of 
truth, there belongs necessarily the question of the kind of Being which 
truth possesses. Together with this we must clarify the ontological meaning 
of the kind of talk in which we say that ‘there is truth’, and we must 
also clarify the kind of necessity with which ‘we must presuppose’ that 
‘there is’ truth (c). 


(a) The Traditional Conception of Truth, and tts Ontological Foundations 

There are three theses which characterize the way in which the essence 
of truth has been traditionally taken and the way it is supposed to have 
been first defined: (1) that the ‘locus’ of truth is assertion (judgment) ; 


(2) that the essence of truth lies in the ‘agreement’ of the judgment with. 


its object; (3) that Aristotle, the father of logic, not only has assigned 
truth to the judgment as its primordial locus but has set going the defini- 
tion of “truth” as ‘agreement’.? , 
Here it is not our aim to provide a history of the concept of truth, which 
could be presented only on the basis of a history of ontology. We shall 
introduce our analytical discussions by alluding to some familiar matters. 
Aristotle says that the maĝýpara ris boys are ray mpeypdrwv ðpows- 
paroXxix—that the soul’s ‘Experiences’, its vowjara (‘representations’), 
are likenings of Things. This assertion, which is by no means proposed as 
an explicit definition of the essence of truth, has also given occasion for 
developing the later formulation of the essence of truth as adaequatio 
intellectus et rei.“ Thomas Aquinas, who refers this definition to Avicenna 
(who, in turn, has taken it over from Isaac Israeli’s tenth-century ‘Book of 
Definitions’) also uses for “adaequatio”’ (likening) the terms “‘correspondentia”’ 
(“correspondence”) and “convenientia’”’ (“‘ coming together”). 


1 Here we follow the older editions in reading ‘. . . hat sowohl die Wahrheit dem Urteil 
als ihrem urspriinglichen Ort zugewiesen als auch die Definition’ der Wahrheit als 
“Übereinstimmung? in Gang gebracht.’ The newer editions read ‘. . . hat sowohl... 
zugewiesen, er hat auch...’ | 

This is usually translated as ‘adequation of the intellect and the thing’. Heidegger 
makes the connection seem closer by sea prey bon the Latin adgequatio and the Greek 
Spoiwpa by the word ‘Angleichung’, which we have somewhat arbitrarily translated as 
‘likening’. 


214 


215 


258 Being and Time 1.6 

The neo-Kantian epistemology of the nineteenth century often char- 
acterized this definition of “truth” as an expression of a methodologically 
retarded naive realism, and declared it to be irreconcilable with any 
formulation of this question which has undergone Kant’s ‘Copernican 
revolution’. But Kant too adhered to this conception of truth, so much so 
that he did not even bring it up for discussion; this has been overlooked, 
though Brentano has already called our attention to it. “The old and 
celebrated question with which it was supposed that one might drive the 
logicians into a corner is this: “what is truth?” The explanation of the 
name of truth—namely, that it is the agreement of knowledge with its 
object—will here be granted and presupposed . . ‘xm, 

‘If truth consists in the agreement of knowledge with its object, then this 
object must thus be distinguished from others; for knowledge is false if it 
does not agree with the object to which it is related, even if it should 
contain something which might well be valid for other objects’ = And 
in the introduction to the “Transcendental Dialectic” Kant stats: ‘Truth 
and illusion are not in the object so far as it is intuitetl, but in the judg- 
ment about it so far as it is thought. ==! 

Of course this characterization of truth as ‘agreement’, edaequatin, 
duoiwers, is very general and empty. Yet it will still have some iustifica- 
tion if it can hold its own without prejudice to any of the mest various 
Interpretations which that distinctive predicate “knowledge” will seaport. 
We „are now inguiring into the foundations cf this ‘relation’. What else is 
tacitly poszisd in imis relational totality of the adaequatic intellectus ef rei? 
And what ontelogical character does that which is ihus posited have itself? 

What in general does one have in view when one uses the term ‘agree- 
ment’? The agreement of something with something has the formal 
character of a relation of something to something. Every agreement, and 
therefore ‘truth’ as well, is a relation. But not every relation is an agree- 
ment. A sign points at what is mdicated.? Such indicating is a relation, 
but not an agreement of the sign with what is indicated. Yet manifestly 
not every agrecment is a convententia of the kind that is fixed upon in the 
definition of “truth”. The number “6” agrees with “16 minus 10”. These 
numbers agree; they are equal with regard to the question of -“how 
much ?” Equality is one way of agreeing. Its structure is such that something 
like a ‘with-regard-to’ belongs to it. In the adaequatio something gets 


related; what is that with regard to which it agrees? In clarifying the . 


‘truth-relation’ we must notice also what is peculiar to the terms of this 
relation. With regard to what do intellectus and res agree? In their kind of 
Being and their essential content do they give us anything at all with 


| _ 4 ‘Bin Zeichen zeigt auf das Gezeigte.’ 


i 


I. 6 Being and ‘Time 259 
regard to which they can agree? If i: i: impossible for intellectus and res to 
be equal because they are not of the same species, are they then perhaps 
similar? But knowledge is sitli supposed to ‘give’ the thing just as it is. 
This ‘agreement’ has the Relational character of the ‘just as’ [*So— 
Wie”]. In what way is this relation possible as a relation between intellectus 
and res? From these questions it becomes plain that to clarify the structure 
of truth it is not enough simply to presuppose this relational totality, but 
we must go back and inquire into the context of Being which provides 
the support for this totality as such. 

Must we, however, bring up here the ‘epistemologica? problematic as 
regards the subject-Object relation, or can our analysis restrict itself to 
Interpreting the “immanent consciousness of truth’, and thus remain 
“within the sphere’ of the subject? According to the general opinion, what 
is true is knowledge. But knowledge is judging. In pidgment ore must 
distinguish between the judging as a Real psychical nrocess, and that which 
is Judged, as an idea. content. It will be sasi of the latter that it is ‘tre’. 
The Real psychical process, however is ctUker present-at-han.Jt or not. 
According to this opinion, the ideal content of judgment stands in a 
relationship of agreement. This relaticnshi thus pertains to a connection 
wetween an ideal content of judgment and the Reas Thing as that whitch 
is judged about. Is this agreement Res! cr ides) in its kind of Reis, or 
neither of these? How are we t take ontolazically the relation beluren an ideal 
entity and scriething thai is Reai and present-at-han’? Such a relation indeed 
subsists [oesteht]; and in factical judgmenis it subsists not only as a rela- 
tion betw-en the content cf judgment ara th: Keal Chiect, but bkewise 
as a relation between the ideal content and the Real act of judgment. 
And does it manifestly subsist ‘more inwardly’ in this latter case? 

Or is the ontological meaning of the relation between Reai and ideal 
(„.8c£ıs) something about which we must not inquire? “Yet the 
relation is to be one which subsists. What does such “subsisting” [Best- 
and] mean ontologically ? 

Why should this not be a legitimate question ? Is it accidental that no 
headway has been made with this problem in over two thousand years? Has 
the question already been perverted in the very way it has been approached 
—in the ontologically unclarified separation of the Real and the ideal? 

And with regard to the ‘actual’ judging of what is judged, is the separa- 
‘tion of the Real act of judgment from the ideal content altogether unjust- 
ified ? Does not the accuality of knowing and judging get broken asunder 
into two ways of Being—two ‘levels’ which can never be pieced together 
in such a manner as to reach the kind of Being that belongs to knowing? 
Is not psychologism correct in holding out against this separation, even 


217 


218 


260 Being and Time 1.6 


if it neither clarifies ontologically the kind of Being which belongs to the 
thinking of that which is thought, nor is even so much as acquainted with 
it as a problem? 

If we go back to the distinction between the act of judgment and its 
content, we shall not advance our discussion of the question of the kind 
of Being which belongs to the adaequatio; we shall only make plain the 
indispensability of clarifying the kind of Being which belongs to knowledge 
itself. In the analysis which this necessitates we must at the same time try 
to bring into view a phenomenon which is characteristic of knowledge— 
the phenomenon of truth. When does truth become phenomenally explicit 
in knowledge itself? It does so when such knowing demonstrates itself as 
true. By demonstrating itself it is assured of its truth. Thus in the pheno- 
menal context of demonstration, the relationship of agreement. must 
become visible. 

Let us suppose that someone with his back turned to the wall makes 
the true assertion that ‘the picture on the wall is hanging askew.’ This 
assertion demonstrates itself when the man who makes it, turns round 
and perceives the picture hanging askew on the wall. What gets demon- 
strated in this demonstration? What is the meaning of ‘‘confirming” 
[Bewährung] such an assertion? Do we, let us say, ascertain some agree- 
ment between our ‘knowledge’ or ‘what is known’ and the Thing on the 
wall? Yes and no, depending upon whether our Interpretation of the 
expression ‘what is known’ is phenomenally appropriate. If he who makes 
the assertion judges without perceiving the picture, but ‘merely repre- 
sents’ it to himself, to what is he related? To ‘representations’, shall we 
say ? Certainly not, if “representation” is here supposed to signify repre- 
senting, as a psychical process. Nor is he related to “representations” in 
the sense of what is thus “represented,” if what we have in mind here is 
a ‘picture’ of that Real Thing which is on the wall.? The asserting which 
‘merely represents’ is related rather, in that sense which is most its own, 
to the Real picture on the wall. What one has in mind is the Real picture, 
and nothing else. Any Interpretation in which something else is here 
slipped in as what one supposedly has in mind in an assertion that merely 
represents, belies the phenomenal facts of the case as to that about which 
the assertion gets made. Asserting is a way of Being towards the Thing 
itself that is.? And what does one’s perceiving of it demonstrate ? Nothing 


1 *Er ist auch nicht auf Vorstellungen bezogen im Sinne des Vorgestellten, sofern damit 
gemeint wird ein “Bild” von dem realen Ding an der Wand.’ While we follow tradition in 
translating ‘Vorstellung’ as ‘representation’, the literal meaning is somewhat closer to 
‘putting before us’. In this sense our ‘picture’ or ‘image’ (‘Bild’) of the actual picture 
(Bild?) on the wall, is itself something which we have ‘put before us’ and which is thus 
‘vorgestellt’, though in English we would hardly call it ‘that which we represent’. 

3 ‘Das Aussagen ist ein Sein zum seienden Ding selbst.’ 


1.6 Being and Time 261 


else than that this Thing zs the very entity which one has in mind in one’s 
assertion. What comes up for confirmation is that this entity is pointed 
out by the Being in which the assertion is made—which is Being towards 
what is put forward in the assertion; thus what is to be confirmed is that 
such Being uncovers the entity towards which it is. What gets demonstrated 
is the Being-uncovering of the assertion.! In carrying out such a demon- 
stration, the knowing remains related solely to the entity itself. In this 
entity the confirmation, as it were, gets enacted. The entity itself which 
one has in mind shows itself just as it is in itself; that is to say, it shows 
that it, in its selfsameness, is just as tf gets pointed out in the assertion as 
being—just as tf gets uncovered as being. Representations do not get 
compared, either among themselves or in relation to the Real Thing. 
What is to be demonstrated is not an agreement of knowing with its 
object, still less of the psychical with the physical; but neither is it an 
agreement between ‘contents of consciousness’ among themselves. What 
-is to be demonstrated is solely the Being-uncovered [Entdeckt-sein] of the 
entity itself—that entity in the “how” of its uncoveredness. This uncovered- 
ness is confirmed when that which is put forward in the assertion (namely 
the entity itself) shows itself as that very same thing. “Confirmation” signifies 
the entity’s showing itself in its selfsameness.X**1V The confirmation is accom- 
plished on the basis of the entity’s showing itself. This is possible only in 
such a way that the knowing which asserts and which gets confirmed is, 
in its ontological meaning, itself a Being towards Real entities, and a Being 
that uncovers. 

To say that an assertion “is true” signifies that it uncovers the entity as 
it is in itself. Such an assertion asserts, points out, ‘lets’ the entity ‘be seen’ 
(amdbavoıs) in its uncoveredness. The Being-true (truth) of the assertion 
must be understood as Being-uncovering*. Thus truth has by no means the 
structure of an agreement between knowing and the object in the sense 
of a likening of one entity (the subject) to another (the Object). 

Being-true as Being-uncovering*, is in turn ontologically possible only 
on the basis of Being-in-the-world. This latter phenomenon, which we 
have known as a basic state of Dasein, is the foundation for the primordial 
phenomenon of truth. We shall now follow this up more penetratingly. 


1 ‘Ausgewiesen wird das Entdeckend-sein der Aussage.’ Here and in the following 
pages we find the expression ‘Entdeckend-sein’ consistently printed with a hyphen in the 
more recent editions. In the older editions it is written sometimes as one word, sometimes 
as two, and it is hyphenated only at the ends of lines. In both editions we sometimes find 
this word printed with a lower-case initial, We have marked such cases with an asterisk ; 
for while we prefer the translation ‘Being-uncovering’ in such cases, the lower-case initia 
suggests that ‘to-be-uncovering’ may be a better reading. 


219 


220 


262 Being and Time I, € 


(b) The Primordial Phenomenon of Truth and the Derivetive Character of the 
Traaitional Conception of Truth 

‘“Being-true” (“truth”) means Being-uncovering*. But is not this a 
highly arbitrary way to define “truth”? By such drastic ways of defining 
this concept we mav succeed in eliminating the idea of agreement from 
the conception of truth. Must we not pay for this dubious gain by plunging 
the ‘good’ old tradition into nullity? But while our definition is seemingi‘ 
arbitrary, it contains only the necessary Interpretation of what was prim- 
ordially surmised in the oldest tradition of ancient philosophy and even 
understood in a pre-phenomenological manner. If a Adyos as amddavou: 
is to be true, its Being-true is dAnBevew in the manner of arwodaiveoda: 
—of taking entities out of their hiddenness and letting them be seen in 
their unhiddenness (their uncoveredness). The aAy¥@eva which Aristotle 
equates with pa) ua and dawdueva in the passages cited above, signifies 
the ‘things themseives’; it signifies what shows itself—enteftes in the “kow” 
of their uncoveredness. And is it accidental that in one of the fragments of 
Heracleitus®®**v—the oldest fraginents of philosophical doctrine in which 
the Adyos is explicitly handled—the phenomenon of truth in the sense of 
uncoveredness (unhiddenness), as we have set it forth, shows through? 
Those who are facking in understanding are contrasted with the Aoyos, 
and also with him who speaks that Adyos, and understands it. The Adyos 
is dpalwy rws exer: it tells how entities comport themselves. But to 
those who are lacking in understanding, what they do remains hidden 
—Aav@dve.. They forget it (émAav@dvovra); that is, for them it 
sinks back into hiddenness. Thus to the Aoyos belongs unhiddenness— 
a-Andeıa. To translate this word as ‘truth’, and, above all, to define 
this expression conceptually in theoretical ways, is to cover up the mean- 
ing of what the Greeks made ‘self-evidently’ basic for the terminological 
use of aAn eva as a pre-philosophical way of understanding it. 

In citing such evidence we must avoid uninhibited word-mysticism. 
Nevertheless, the ultimate business of philosophy is to preserve the force 
of the most elemental words in which Dasein expresses itself, and to keep the 
common understanding from levelling them off to that unintelligibility 
which functions in turn as a source of pseudo-problems. 

We have now given a phenomenal demonstration of what we set forth 
earlier™=¥! as to Adyos and dA7yGea in, so to speak, a dogmatic Inter- 
pretation. In proposing our ‘definition’ of “truth” we have not shaken off 
the tradition, but we have appropriated it primordially; and we shall have 
done so all the more if we succeed in demonstrating that the idea of 
agreement is one to which theory had to come on the basis of the prim- 
ordial phenomenon of truth, and if we can show how this came about, 


1. 6 Being and Time 263 


Moreover, the ‘definition’ of “truth” as “uncoveredness” and as 
“Being-uncovering”, it not a mere explanation of a word. Among those 
ways in which Dasein comports itself there are some which we are accus- 
tomed in the first instance to call ‘true’; from the analysis of these our 
definition emerges. 

Being-true as Being-uncovering*, is a way of Being for Dasein. What 
makes this very uncovering possible must necessarily be called ‘true’ in 
a still more primordial sense. The most primordial phenomenon of truth ts first 
shown by the existential-ontological foundations of uncovering. 

Uncovering is a way of Being for Being-in-the-world. Circumspective 
concern, or even that concern in which we tarry and look at something, 
uncovers entities within-the-world. These entities become that which has 
been uncovered. They are ‘true’ in a second sense. What is primarily 
‘true’—that is, uncovering—is Dasein. ‘“Truth” in the second sense does 
not mean Being-uncovering* (uncovering), but Being-uncovered (un- 
coveredness). 

Our earlier analysis of the worldhood of the world and of entities within- 
the-world has shown, however, that the uncoveredness of entities within- 
the-world is grounded in the world’s disclosedness. But disclosedness is that 
basic character of Dasein according to which it ts its “there”. Disclosedness 
is constituted by state-of-mind, understanding, and discourse, and pertains 
equiprimordially to the world, to Being-in, and to the Self. In its very 
structure, care is ahead of itself—Being already in a world—as Being 
alongside entities within-the-world; and in this structure che disclosedness 
of Dasein lies hidden. With and through it is uncoveredness;! hence only 
with Dasein’s disclosedness is the most primordial phenomenon of truth 
attained. What we have pointed out earlier with regard to the existential 
Constitution of the ‘‘there’’***vii and in relation to the everyday Being 
of the “there” poviti pertains to the most primordial phenomenon of 
truth, nothing less. In so far as Dasein zs its disclosedness essentially, and 
discloses and uncovers as something disclosed to this extent it is essen- 
tially ‘true’. Dasein is ‘in the truth’. This assertion has meaning ontologically. 
It does not purport to say that ontically Dasein is introduced ‘to all the 
truth’ either always or just in every case, but rather that the disclosedness 
of its ownmost Being belongs to its existential constitution. 

If we accept the results we have obtained earlier, the full existential 
meaning of the principle that ‘Dasein is in the truth’ can be restored by 
the following considerations: 


1 ‘Mit und durch sie ist Entdecktheit . . > Our version reflects the ambiguity of the 
German, which leaves the grammatical function of the pronoun ‘sie’ obscure and permits 
it to reıer either to ‘the disclosedness of Dasein’, to ‘care’, or—perhaps most likely—to 
‘the structure of care’. 


221 


222 


264 Being and Time 1.6 


(1) To Dasein’s state of Being, disclosedness in general essentially belongs. 
It embraces the whole of that structure-of-Being which has become 
explicit through the phenomenon of care. To care belongs not only Being- 
in-the-world but also Being alongside entities within-the-world. The 
uncoveredness of such entities is equiprimordial with the Being of Dasein 
and its disclosedness. 

(2) To Dasein’s state of Being belongs thrownness ; indeed it is constitutive 
for Dasein’s disclosedness. In thrownness is revealed that in each case 
Dasein, as my Dasein and this Dasein, is already in a definite world and 
alongside a definite range of definite entities within-the-world.? Dis- 
closedness is essentially factical. - 

(3) To Dasein’s state of Being belongs projection—-disclosive Being to- . 
wards its potentiality-for-Being. As something that understands, Dasein, 
can understand itself in terms of the ‘world’ and Others or in terms of its 
ownmost potentiality-for-Being.* The possibility just mentioned means 
that Dasein discloses itself to itself in and as its ownmost potentiality-for 
Being. This authentic disclosedness shows the phenomenon of the most 
primordial truth in the mode of authenticity. The most primordial, and 
indeed the most authentic, disclosedness in which Dasein, as a potent- 
iality-for-Being, can be, is the truth of existence. This becomes existentially 
and ontologically definite only in connection with the analysis of Dasein’s 
authenticity. 

(4) To Dasein’s state of Being belongs falling. Proximally and for the 
most part Dasein is lost in its ‘world’. Its understanding, as a projection 
upon possibilities of Being, has diverted itself thither. Its absorption in the 
“they” signifies that it is dominated by the way things are publicly 
interpreted. That which has been uncovered and disclosed stands in a 
mode in which it has been disguised and closed off by idle talk, curiosity, 
and ambiguity. Being towards entities has not been extinguished, but it 
has been uprooted. Entities have not been completely hidden; they are 
precisely the sort of thing that has been uncovered, but at the same time 
they have been disguised. They show themselves, but in the mode of 
semblance. Likewise what has formerly been uncovered sinks back again, 
hidden and disguised. Because Dasein is essentially falling, its state of Being is 
such that it is in ‘untruth’. This term, like the expression ‘falling’, is here 
used ontologically. If we are to use it in existential analysis, we must 


1 ‘In ihr enthüllt sich, dass Dasein je schon als meines und dieses in einer bestimmten 
Welt und bei einem bestimmten Umkreis von bestimmten innerweltlichen Seienden ist.’ 

2‘... der Entwurf: das erschliessende Sein zu seinem Seinkönnen. Dasein kann sich als 
verstehendes aus der “Welt” und den Anderen her verstehen oder aus seinem eigensten 
Seinkönnen.’ The earlier editions have a full stop after ‘Entwurf’ rather than a colon, and 
introduce ‘das’ with a capital. The grammatical function of ‘als verstehendes’ seems 
ambiguous. 


1.6 Being and Time 265 


avoid giving it any ontically negative ‘evaluation’. To be closed off and 
covered up belongs to Dasein’s facticity. In its full existential-ontological 
meaning, the proposition that ‘Dasein is in the truth’ states equiprim- 
ordially that ‘Dasein is in untruth’. But only in so far as Dasein has been 
disclosed has it also been closed off; and only in so far as entities within- 
the-world have been uncovered along with Dasein, have such entities, 
as possibly encounterable within-the-world, been covered up (hidden) or 
disguised. 

It is therefore essential that Dasein should explicitly appropriate what 
has already been uncovered, defend it against semblance and disguise, and 
assure itself of its uncoveredness again and again. The uncovering of 
anything new is never done on the basis of having something completely 
hidden, but takes its departure rather from uncoveredness in the mode of 
semblance. Entities look as if... That is, they have, in a certain way, 
been uncovered already, and yet they are still disguised. 

Truth (uncoveredness) is something that must always first be wrested 
from entities. Entities get snatched out of their hiddenness. The factical 
uncoveredness of anything is always, as it were, a kind of robbery. Is it 
accidental that when the Greeks express themselves as to the essence of 
truth, they use a privative expression—a-A7} Gera ? When Dasein so expresses 
itself, does not a primordial understanding of its own Being thus make 
itself known—the understanding (even if it is only pre-ontological) that 
Being-in-untruth makes up an essential characteristic of Being-in-the 
world ? 

The goddess of Truth who guides Parmenides, puts two pathways 
before him, one of uncovering, one of hiding; but this signifies nothing 
else than that Dasein is already both in the truth and in untruth. The way 
of uncovering is achieved only in «pive:y Aoyw—in distinguishing between 
these understandingly, and making one’s decision for the one rather 
than the other.>>1s 

The existential-ontological condition for the fact that Being-in-the- 
world is characterized by ‘truth’ and ‘untruth’, lies in that state of Dasein’s 
Being which we have designated as thrown projection. This is something that 
is constitutive for the structure of care. 

The upshot of our existential-ontological Interpretation of the pheno- 
menon of truth is ‘1) that truth, in the most primordial sense, is Dasein’s 
disclosedness, to which the uncoveredness of entities within-the-world 
belongs; and (2) that Dasein is equiprimordially both in the truth and in 
untruth. 

Within the horizon of the traditional Interpretation of the phenomenon 
of truth, our insight into these principles will not be complete until it can 


223 


224 


266 Being and Time I. 6 


be shown: (1) that truth, understood as agreement, originates from dis- 
closedness by way of definite modification; (2) that the kind of Being 
which belongs to disclosedness itself is such that its derivative modification 


first comes into view and leads the way for the theoretical explication = 


the structure of truth. 

Assertion and its structure (namely; the apophantical as”) are founded 
upon interpretation and its structure (viz, the hermeneutical ‘‘as’’) and 
also upon understanding—upon Dasein’s disclosedness. Truth, however, 
is regarded as a distinctive character of assertion as so derived. Thus the 
roots of the truth of assertion reach back to the disclosedness of the under- 
standing.*! But over and above these indications of how the truth of 
assertion has originated, the phenomenon of agreement must not be 
exhibited expiicıtly in its derivative character. 

Our Being alongside entities within-the-world is concern, and this is 
Being which uncovers. To Dasein’s disclosedness, however, discourse 
belongs essentially.x!! Dasein expresses itself [spricht sich aus]: it expresses 
itself as a Being-towards entities—a Being-towards which uncovers. ‘And 
in assertion it expresses itseif as such about entities which have been 
uncovered. Assertion communicates entities in the “how” of their un- 
coveredness, When Dasein is aware of the communication, it brings itself 
in its awareness into an uncovering Being-towards the entities discussed. 
The assertian which is expressed is about something, and in what it is 
about [in ihrem Worüber] it contains the uncoveredness of these entities. 
This uncoveredness is preserved in what ig expressed. What is expressed 
becomes, as it were, something ready-to-hand within-the-world which can 
be taken up and spoken again.! Because the uncoveredness has been 
preserved, that which is expressed (which thus is ready-to-hand) has in 
itself a relation to any entities about which it is, an assertion. Any un- 
coveredness is an uncoveredness of something. Even when Dasein speaks 
over again what someone else has said, it comes into a Being-towards the 
very entities which have been discussed.® But it has been exempted from 
having to uncover them again, primordially, and it holds that it has 
been thus exempted. 

Dasein need not bring itself face to face with entities themselves in an 
‘original’ experience; but it nevertheless remains in a Being-towards these 
entities. In a large measure uncoveredness gets appropriated not by one’s 
own uncovering, but rather by hearsay of something that has been said. 


1 ‘Das Ausgesprochene vu pie tain zu einem innerweltlich Zuhandenen, das 
ommen und ee 
policy i in translating ‘das Ausgesprochene’ as ‘what is expressed’, it might perhaps be 
translated as ‘that which i is spoken out’, ‘the utterance’, or even ‘the pronouncement’. 
2 “Auch im Nachsprechen kommt das nachsprechende Dasein in ein Sein zum be- 
sprochenen Seienden selbst.’ 


en werden kann.’ While we have followed our usual . 


! 


I. 6 Being and Time 267 
Absorption in something that has been said belongs to the kind of Being 
which the “they” possesses. That which has been expressed as such takes 
over Being-towards those entities which have been uncovered in the asser- 
tion. If, however, these entities are to be appropriated explicitly with 
regard to their uncoveredness, this amounts to saying that the assertion 
is to be demonstrated as one that uncovers. But the assertion expressed is 
something ready-to-hand, and indeed in such a way that, as something 
by which uncoveredness is preserved, it has in itself a relation to the 
entities uncovered. Now to demonstrate that it is something which 
uncovers [ihres Entdeckend-seins] means to demonstrate how the asser- 
tion by which the uncoveredness is preserved is related żo these entities. 
The assertion is something ready-to-hand. The entities to which it is 
related as something that uncovers, are either ready-to-hand or present- 
at-hand within-the-world. The relation itself presents itself thus, as one 
that is present-at-hand. But this relation lies in the fact that the uncovered- 
ness preserved in the assertion is in each case an uncoveredness o f some- 
thing. The judgment ‘contains something which holds for the objects’ 
(Kant), But the relation itself now acquires the character of presence-at- 
hand by getting switched over to a relationship between things which are 
present-at-hand. The uncoveredness,pf something becomes the present- 
at-hand conformity of one thing which is present-at-hand—the assertion 
expressed—io something else which is present-at-hand—the entity under 
discussion. And if this conformity is seen only as a relationship between 
things which are present-at-hand—that is, if the kind of Being which 
belongs to the terms of this relationship has not been discriminated and is 
understood as something merely present-at-hand—then the relation shows 
itself as an agreement of two things which are present-at-hand, an agree- 
ment which is present-at-hand itself. 

When the assertion has been expressed, the uncoveredness of the entity moves into 
the kind of Being of that which ts ready-to-hand within-the-world.' But now to the 
extent that in this uncoveredness, as an uncoveredness of something, a 
relationship to something present-at-hand persisis, the uncoveredness (truth) becomes, 
for its part, a relationship between things which are present-at-hand intellectus 
and res)—a relationship that is present-at-hand itself. 

Though it is founded upon Dasein’s disclosedness, the existential 
phenomenon of uncoveredness becomes a property which is present-at- 
hand but in which there still lurks a relational character; and as such a 
property, it gets broken asunder into a relationship which is present-at- 
hand. Truth as disclosedness and as a Being-towards uncovered entities—a 


1 ‘Die Entdecktheit des Seienden rückt mit der Ausgesprochenheit der Aussage in die Seinsart des 
innerweltlich Zuhandenen.’ 


225 


226 


268 Being and Time I. 6 


Being which itself uncovers—has become truth as agreement. between 
things which are present-at-hand within-the-world. And thus we have 
pointed out the ontologically derivative character of the traditional con- 
ception of truth. . 

Yet that which is last in the ordiit: of the way things are connected in 
their foundations existentially and otıtologically, is regarded ontically 
and factically as that which is first and closest to us. The necessity of this 
Fact, however, is based in turn upon the kind of Being which Dasein itself 
possesses. Dasein, in its concernful absorption, understands itself in terms 
of what it encounters within-the-world. The uncoveredness which belongs 
to uncovering, is something that we come across proximally within-the- 
world in that which has been expressed [im Ausgesprochenen]. Not only 
truth, however, is encountered as present-at-hand: in general our under- 
standing of Being is such that every entity is understood in the first 
instance as present-at-hand. If the ‘truth’ which we encounter proximally 
in an ontical manner is considered ontologically in the way that is closest 
to us, then the Adyos (the assertion) gets understood as Adyos rırös— 
as an assertion about something, an uncoveredness of something; but 
the phenomenon gets Interpreted as something present-at-hand with 
regard to its possible presence-at-hand.! Yet because presence-at-hand 
has been equated with the meaning of Being in general, the question of 
whether this kind of Being of truth is a primordial one, and whether there 
is anything primordial in that structure of it which we encounter as 
closest to us, can not come alive at all. The primordial phenomenon of truth has 
been covered up by Dasein’s very understanding of Being—that understanding which 
is proximally the one that prevails, and which even today has not been surmounted 
explicitly and in principle. 

At the same time, however, we must not overlook the fact that while this 
way of understanding Being (the way which is closest to us) is one which the 
Greeks were the first to develop as a branch of knowledge and to master, 
the primordial understanding of truth was simultaneously alive among 
them, even if pre-ontologically, and it even held its own against the con- 
cealment implicit in their ontology—at least in Aristotle.x111 

Aristotle never defends the thesis that the primordial ‘locus’ of truth 
is in the judgment. He says rather that the Adyos is that way of Being in 
which Dasein can either uncover or cover up. This double possibility is what 
is distinctive in the Being-true of the Adyos: the Acyos is that way of 
comporting oneself which can also cover things up. And because Aristotle 
never upheld the thesis we have mentioned, he was also never in a 


F 1‘, . interpretiert aber das Phänomen als Vorhandenes auf seine mögliche Vorhan- 
enheit.’ 


1. 6 Being and Time 269 


situation to ‘broaden’ the conception of truth in the Adyos to include pure 
voeiv. The truth of aioßnoıs and of the seeing of ‘ideas’ is the prim- 
ordial kind of uncovering. And only because vdéyots primarily uncovers, 
can the Adyos as ĝıavoeîy also have uncovering as its function. 

Not only is it wrong to invoke Aristotle for the thesis that the genuine 
‘locus’ of truth lies in the judgment; even in its content this thesis fails 
to recognize the structure of truth. Assertion is not the primary ‘locus’ of 
truth. On the contrary, whether as a mode in which uncoveredness is appro- 
priated or as a way of Being-in-the-world, assertion is grounded in Dasein’s 
uncovering, or rather in its disclosedness. The most primordial ‘truth’ is 
the ‘locus’ of assertion; it is the ontological condition for the possibility 
that assertions can be either true or false—that they may uncover or 
cover things up. 

Truth, understood in the most primordial sense, belongs to the basic 
constitution of Dasein. The term signifies an extstentiale. But herewith we 
have already sketched out our answers to the question of what kind of 
Being truth possesses, and to the question of in what sense it is necessary 
to presuppose that ‘there is truth’. 


(c) The Kind of Being which Truth Possesses, and the Presupposition of Truth 

Dasein, as constituted by disclosedness, is essentially in the truth. 
Disclosedness is a kind of Being which is essential to Dasein. ‘There ts’ 
truth only in so far as Dasein i s and so long as Dasein is. Entities are un- 
covered only when Dasein ts; and only as long as Dasein is, are they 
aiscloscd. Newton’s laws, the principle of contradiction, any truth whatever 
—-these are true only as long as Dasein is. Before there was any Dasein, 
there was no truth; nor will there be any after Dasein is no more. For in 
such a case truth as disclosedness, uncovering, and uncoveredness, cannot 
be. Before Newton’s laws were discovered, they were not ‘true’; it does 
not follow that they were false, or even that they would become false if 
ontically no discoveredness were any longer possible. Just as little does 
this ‘restriction’ imply that the Being-true of ‘truths’ has in any way been 
diminished. 

To say that before Newton his laws were neither true nor false, cannot 
signify that before him there were no such entities as have been uncovered 
and pointed out by those laws. Through Newton the laws became true; 
and with them, entities became accessible in themselves to Dasein. Once 
entities have been uncovered, they show themselves precisely as entities 
which beforehand already were. Such uncovering is the kind of Being 
which belongs to ‘truth’. 

That there are ‘eternal truths’ will not be adequately proved until 


227 


G? 


228 


270 Being and Time I.6 


someone has succeeded in demonstrating that Dasein has been and will 
be for all eternity. As long as such a proof is still outstanding, this principle 
remains a fanciful contention which does not gain in legitimacy from 
having philosophers commonly ‘believe’ it. 

Because the kind of Being that is essential to truth ts of the character of Dasein, 
all truth is relative to Dasein’s Being. Does this relativity signify that all truth 
is ‘subjective’ ? If one Interprets ‘subjective’ as ‘left to the subject’s discre- 
tion’, then it certainly does not. For uncovering, in the sense which is most 
its own, takes asserting out of the province of ‘subjective’ discretion, and 
brings the uncovering Dasein face to face with the entities themselves. 
And only because ‘truth’, as uncovering, ts a kind of Being which belongs to 
Dasein, can it be taken out of the province of Dasein’s discretion. Even the 
‘universal validity’ of truth is rooted solely in the fact that Dasein can 
uncover entities in themselves and free them. Only so can these entities 
in themselves be binding for every possible assertion—that is, for 
every way of pointing them out.! If truth has been correctly under- 
stood, is it in the least impaired by the fact that it is ontically possible 
only in the ‘subject’ and that it stands and falls with the Being of that 
‘subject’ ? 

Now that we have an existential conception of the kind of Being that 
belongs to truth, the meaning of “presupposing the truth” also becomes 
intelligible. Why must we presuppose that there is truth? What is ‘presupposing’ ? 
What do we have in mind with the ‘must’ and the ‘we’? What does it 
mean to say ‘there is truth’? ‘We’ presuppose truth because ‘we’, being 
in the kind of Being which Dasein possesses, are ‘in the truth’. We do not 
presuppose it as something ‘outside’ us and ‘above’ us, towards which, 
along with other ‘values’, we comport ourselves. It is not we who pre- 
suppose ‘truth’; but it is ‘truth’ that makes it at all possible ontologically 
for us to be able to be such that we ‘presuppose’. anything at all. Truth is 
what first makes posstble anything like presupposing. 

What does it mean to ‘presuppose’? It is to understand something as 
the ground for the Being of some other entity, Such understanding of an 
entity in its interconnections of Being, is possible only on the ground of 
disclosedness—that is, on the ground of Dasein’s Being something which 
uncovers. Thus to presuppose ‘truth’ means to understand it as something 
for the sake of which Dasein is. But Dasein is already ahead of itself in 
each case; this is implied in its state-of-Being as care. It is an entity for 
which, in its Being, its ownmost potentiality-for-Being is an issue. To 
Dasein’s Being and its potentiality-for-Being as Being-in-the-world, 


1 ‘Auch die “Allgemeingiltigkeit” der Wahrheit ist lediglich verwurzelt, dass das 
Dasein Seiendes an ihm selbst entdecken und freigeben kann. Nur so vermag dieses 
Seiende an ihm selbst jede mögliche Aussage, das heisst Aufzeigung seiner, zu binden.’ 


1. 6 Being and Time 271 
disclosedness and uncovering belong essentially. To Dasein its potentiality- 
for-Being-in-the-world is an issue, and this includes! concerning itself witis 
entities within-the-world and uncovering them circumspectively. In 
Dasein’s state-of-Being as care, in Being-ahead-of-itself, lies the most 
primordial ‘ presupposing’. Because this presupposing of itself belongs to Dasein’s 


Being, ‘we’ must also presuppose ‘ourselves’ as having the attribute of disclosedness, - 
There are also entities with a character other than that of Dasein, but: the’ e 
‘presupposing’ which lies in Dasein’s Being does not relate itself to these; A 


it relates itself solely to Dasein itself. The truth which has been pree | 
supposed, or the ‘there is’ by which its Being is to be defined, has that’ 
kind of Being—or meaning of Being—which belongs to Dasein itself. We : 


must ‘make’ the presupposition of truth because it is one that has been u 


‘made’ already with the Being of the ‘we’, 
We must presuppose truth. Dasein itself, as in each case m y Dasein and 
this Dasein, must be; and in the same way the truth, as Dasein’s dis- 


closedness, must be. This belongs to Dasein’s essential thrownness into'the 


world. Has Dasein as itseif ever decided freely whether it wants to come into 
‘Daseisi’ or not, and will it ever be able to make such a decision? ‘In itself” it is 
quite incomprehensible why entities are to be uncovered, why truth and 
Dasein must be. The usual refutation of that scepticism which denies 
either the Being of ‘truth’ or its cognizability, stops half way. What it 
shows, as a formal argument, is simply that if anything gets judged, truth 
has been presupposed. This suggests that ‘truth’ belongs to assertion— 
that pointing something out is, by its very meaning, an uncovering. But 
when one says this, one has to clarify why that in which there lies the onto- 
logical ground for this necessary connection between assertion and truth 
as regards their Being, must be as it is. The kind of Being which belongs 
to truth is likewise left completely obscure, and so is the meaning of 
presupposing, and that of its ontological foundation in Dasein itself. 
Moreover, one here fails to recognize that even when nobody judges, 
truth already gets presupposed in so far as Dasein is at all. 

A sceptic can no more be refuted than the Being of truth can be 
‘proved’, And if any sceptic of the kind who denies the truth, factically is, 
he does not even need to be refuted. In so far as he is, and has understood 
himself in this Being, he has obliterated Dasein in the desperation of 
suicide; and in doing so, he has also obliterated truth. Because Dasein, 
for its own part, cannot first be subjected to proof, the necessity of truth 
cannot be proved either. It has no more been demonstrated that there 
ever has ‘been’ an ‘actual’ sceptic® (though this is what has at bottom 


1 1 Reading ‘und darin’ with the newer editions. The older editions have ‘d.h. u.a.’ 
. dass es je... . einen “wirklichen” Skeptiker “gegeben” hat.’ The older editions 
meee nie’ (‘never’) instead of ‘je’ (‘ever’). 


3 


229 


230 


272 Being and Time 1. 6 


been believed in the refutations of scepticism, in spite of what these under- 
take to do) than it has been demonstrated that there are any ‘eternal 
truths’. But perhaps such sceptics have been more frequent than one 
would innocently like to have true when one tries to bowl over ‘scepticism’ 
by formal dialectics. 

Thus with the question of the Being of truth and the necessity of pre- 
supposing it, just as with the question of the essence of knowledge, an 
‘ideal subject’ has generally been posited. The motive for this, whether 
explicit or tacit, lies in the requirement that philosophy should have the 
‘a priori’ as its theme, rather than ‘empirical facts’ as such. There is some 
justification for this requirement, though it still needs to be grounded 
ontologically. Yet is this requirement satisfied by positing an ‘ideal 
subject’? Is not such a subject a fanciful idealization? With such a concep- 
tion have we not missed precisely the a priort character of that merely 
‘factual’ subject, Dasein? Is it not an attribute of the « priori character of 
the factical subject (that is, an attribute of Dasein’s facticity) that it is in 
the truth and in untruth equiprimordially ? 

The ideas of a ‘pure “I” ’ and of a ‘consciousness in general’ are so far 
from including the a priori character of ‘actual’ subjectivity that the onto- 
logical characters of Dasein’s facticity and its state of Being are either 
passed over or not seen at all. Rejection of a ‘consciousness in gencral’ 
does not signify that the a priori is negated, any more than the positing 
of an idealized subject guarantees that Dasein has an a priori character 
grounded upon faci. 

Both the contention that there are ‘eternal truths’ and the jumbling 
together of Dasein’s phenomenally grounded ‘ideality’ with an idealized 
absolute subject, belong to those residues of Christian theology within 
philosophical problematics which have not as yet been radically 
extruded. 

The Being of truth is connected primordially with Dasein. And only 
because Dasein is as constituted by disclosedness (that is, by under- 
standing), can anything like Being be understood; only so is it possible 
to understand Being. A 

Being (not entities) is something which ‘there is’ only in so far as truth 
is. And truth ts only in so far as and as long as Dasein is. Being and truth 
‘are’ equiprimordially. What does it signify that Being ‘is’, where Being 
is to be distinguished from every entity? One can ask this concretely only 
if the meaning of Being and the full scope of the understanding of Being 
have in general been clarified. Only then can one also analyse primordially 
what belongs to the concept of a science of Being as such, and to its pds- 
sibilities and its variations. And in demarcating this research and its 


I. 6 Being and Time 273 


truth, the kind of research in which entities are uncovered, and its accom- 
panying truth, must be defined ontologically. 

The answer to the question of the meaning of Being has yet to be giver: 
[steht . . . aus]. What has cur fundamental analysis of Dasein, as we have 
carried it out so far, contributed to working out this question? By iaying 
bare the phenomenon of care, we have clarified the state of Being of that 
entity to whose Being something like an understanding of Being beiungs. 
At the same time the Being of Dasein has thus beer distinguished from 
modes of Being (readiness-to-hand, presence-at-hand, Reality) which 
characterize entities with a character other than ihat of Dasein. Utes. 
standing has itself been elucidated; and at the same time the method- 
ological transparency of the procedure of Interpreting Being by under 
standing it and interpreting it, has thus been guaranteed. 

If in care we have arrived at Dasein’s primordial state of Being, shen 
this must also no the basis for conceptualizing that understanding of 
Being which ies ir care; that is to say, if must be possible to defixe the 
meaning of Being. Pui mwane phenomenon of eare one in which the most 
primordial existent i-cntolomical stat: of Dasein is disclosed? Ami has 
the structural mancoiduess which lics in this phenomenon, presente? us 
with the most prirasrdial totality cf factical Dasein’s Being? Has our 


to 


investigation up to tius point ever brought Dasein into view ar a whia? 


241 


DBE Y TWO 
DASEIN AND TEMPORALITY}? 


T 45. Tie Dutcome of the Preparatory Fundamental Analysis of Dasein, and the 
Task of e *rimordial Existential Interpretation of this Entity 

WHAT ve we gained by our preparatory analysis of Dasein, and what 
are we seolıng? In Being-in-the-world, whose essential structures centre 
in discic3..uness, we have found the basic state of the entity we have taken as 
our theme. The totality of Being-in-the-world as a structural whole has 
revealed itself as care. In care the Being of Dasein is included. When we 
came to analyse this Being, we took as our clue existence!, which, in anti- 
cipation, we had designated as the essence of Dasein. This term “exist- 
ence” formally indicates that Dasein ts as an understanding potentiality- 
for-Being, which, in its Being, makes an issue of that Being itself. In every 
case, I myself am the entity which is in such a manner [dergestalt seiend]. 
By working out the phenomenon of care, we have given ourselves an insight 
into the concrete constitution of existence—that is, an insight into its 
equiprimordial connection with Dasein’s facticity and its falling. 

What we are seeking is the answer to the question about the meaning of 
Being in general, and, prior to that, the possibility of working out in a 
radical manner this basic question of all ontology. But to lay bare the 
horizon within which something like Being in general becomes intelligible, 
is tantamount to clarifying the possibility of having any understanding of 
Being at all—an understanding which itself belongs to the constitution of 
the entity called Dasein.!! The understanding of Being, however, cannot 
be radically clarified as an essential element in Dasein’s Being, unless the 
entity to whose Being it belongs, has been Interpreted primordially in 
itself with regard to its Being. 

Are we entitled to the claim that in characterizing Dasein ontologically 
qua care we have given a primordial Interpretation of this entity ? By what 
criterion is the existential analytic of Dasein to be assessed as regards its 


1 ‘Dasein und Zeitlichkeit’. In this heading and in others which follow in this Division, 
we have capitalized such words as ‘temporal’ and ‘constitution’ in accordance with normal 
practice in titles, even when this violates the orthographic conventions of our translation. 


wer 


IT Being and Time 275 
primordiality, or the lack of it? What, indeed, do we mean by the 


. ““primordiality” of an ontological Interpretation ? 


Ontological investigation is a possible kind of interpreting, which we 
have described as the working-out and appropriation of an under- 
standing.!!! Every interpretation has its fore-having, its fore-sight, and its 
fore-conception. If such an interpretation, as Interpretation, becomes an 
explicit task for research, then the totality of these ‘presuppositions’ 
(which we call the “hermeneutical Situation”) needs to be clarified and made 
secure beforehand, both in a basic experience of the ‘object’ to be dis- 
closed, and in terms of such an experience. In ontological Interpretation 
an entity is to be laid bare with regard to its own state of Being; such an 
Interpretation obliges us first to give a phenomenal characterization of 
the entity we have taken as our theme, and thus to bring it into the scope 
of our fore-having, with which all the subsequent steps of our analysis are 
to conform. But at the same time these steps need to be guided by what- 
ever fore-sight is possible as to the kind of Being which the entity may 
possess. Our fore-having and our fore-sight will then give us at the same 
time a sketch of that way of conceiving (or fore-conception) to the level 
of which all structures of Being are to be raised. 

If, however, the ontological Interpretation is to be a primordial one, 
this not only demands that in general the hermeneutical Situation shall 
be one which has been made secure in conformity with the phenomena; 
it also requires explicit assurance that the whole of the entity which it has 
taken as its theme has been brought into the fore-having. Similarly, it 
is not enough just to make a first sketch of the Being of this entity, even if 
our sketch is grounded in the phenomena. If we are to have a fore-sight 
of Being, we must see it in such a way as not to miss the unity of those struc- 
tural items which belong to it and are possible. Only then can the question 
of the meaning of the unity which belongs to the whole entity’s totality 
of Being, be formulated and answered with any phenomenal assurance. 

Has the existential analysis of Dasein which we have carried out, arisen 
from such a hermeneutical Situation as will guarantee the primordiality 
which fundamental ontology demands? Can we progress from the result 
we have obtained—that the being of Dasein is care—to the question of the 
pr‘mordial unity of this structural whole? 

What is the status of the fore-sight by which our ontological procedure 
has hitherto been guided? We have defined the idea of existence as 
a potentiality-for-Being—a potentiality which understands, and for which 
its own Being is an issue. But this potentiality-for-Being, as one which is in 
each case mine, is free either for authenticity or for inauthenticity or for 
a mode in which neither of these has been differentiated.” In starting with 


GA? 


233 


276 Being and Time 11 
average everydayness, our Interpretation has heretofore been confined to 
the analysis of such existing as is either undifferentiated or inauthentic. 
Of course even along this path, it was possible and indeed necessary to 
reach a concrete determination of the existentiality of existence. Never- 
theless, our ontological characterization of the constitution of existence 
still lacked something essential. “Existence” means a potentiality-for-Being 
—but also one which is authentic. As long as the existential structure 
of an authentic potentiality-for-Being has not been brought into the 
idea of existence, the fore-sight by which an existential Interpretation is 
guided will lack primordiality. 

And how about what we have had in advance in our hermeneutical 
Situation hitherto? How about its fore-having? When and how has our 
existential analysis received any assurance that by starting with everyday- 
ness, it has forced the whole of Dasein—this entity from its ‘beginning’ to 
its ‘end’—into the phenomenological view which gives us our theme? 
We have indeed contended that care is the totality of the structural whole 
of Dasein’s constitution.’ But have we not at the very outset of our Inter- 
pretation renounced the possibility of bringing Dasein into view as a whole? 
Everydayness is precisely ‘hat Being which is ‘between’ birth and death. 
And if existence is definitive for Dasein’s Being and if its essence is con- 
stituted in part by potentiality-for-Being, then, 2- long as Dasein exists, 
it must in each case, as such a potentiality, not yet be something. Any entity 
whose Essence is made up of existence, is essentially opposed to the 
possibility of our getting it in our grasp as an entity which is a 
whole. Not only has the hermeneutical Situation hitherto given us no 
assurance of ‘having’ the whole entity: one may even question whether 
“having” the whole entity is attainable at all, and whether a primordial 
ontological Interpretation of Dasein will not founder on the kind of Being 
which belongs to the very entity we have taken as our theme. 

One thing has become unmistakable: our existential analysis of Dasein up 
till now cannot lay claim to primordiality. Its fore-having never included more 
than the inauthentic Being of Dasein, and of Dasein as less than a whole 
[als unganzes]. If the Interpretation of Dasein’s Being is to become prim- 
ordial, as a foundation for working out the basic question of ontology, 
then it must first have brought to light existentially the Being of Dasein 
in its possibilities of authenticity and totality. 

Thus arises the task of putting Dasein as a whole into our fore-having. 
This signifies, however, that we must first of all raise the question of this 
entity’s potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. As long as Dasein is, there is in 
every case something still outstanding, which Dasein can be and will be. 


234 But to that which is thus outstanding, the ‘end’ itself belongs. The ‘end’ 


II Being and Time 277 


of Being-in-the-world is death. This end, which belongs to the potent- 
iality-for-Being—that is to say, to existence—limits and determines in 
every case whatever totality is possible for Dasein. If, however, Dasein’s 
Being-at-an-end! in death, and therewith its Being-a-whole, are to be 
included in the discussion of its possibly Being-a-whole, and if this is to be 
done in a way which is appropriate to the phenomena, then we must have 
obtained an ontologically adequate conception of death—that is to say 
an existential conception of it. But as something of the character of Dasein, 
death ts only in an existentiell Being towards death [Sein zum Tode]. The 
existential structure of such Being proves to be the ontolcgically constitu- 
tive state of Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. Thus the whole 
existing Dasein allows itself to be brought into our existential fore-having. 
But can Dasein also exist authentically as a whole? How is the authenticity 
of existence to be determined at all, if not with regard to authentic 
existing? Where do we get our criterton for this? Manifestly, Dasein 
itself must, in its Being, present us with the possibility and the manner of 
its authentic existence, unless such existence is something that can be 
imposed upon it ontically, or ontologically fabricated. But an authentic 
potentiality-for-Being is attested by the conscience. And conscience, as a 
phenomenon of Dasein, demands, like death, a genuinely existential 
Interpretation. Such an Interpretation leads to the insight that Dasein has 
an authentic potentiality-for-Being in that it wants to have a conscience. But 
this is an existentiell possibility which tends, from the very meaning of its 
Being, to be made definite in an existentiell way by Being-towards-death. 

By pointing out that Dasein has an authentic potenttality-for-Being-a-whole, 
the existential analytic acquires assurance as to the censtitution of Dasein’s 
primordial Being. But at the same time the authentic potentiality-for-Being- 
a-whole becomes visible as a mode of care. And therewith the pheno- 
menally adequate ground for a primordial Interpretation of the mea. iy 
of Dasein’s Being has also been assured. 

But the primordial ontological basis for Dasein’s existentiality is sn- 
porality. In terms of temporality, the articulated structural totality of 
Dasein’s Being as care first becomes existentially intelligible. The In‘ :- 
pretation of the meaning of Dasein’s Being cannot stop with this den: +- 
stration. The existential-temporal analysis of this entity needs to "se 
confirmed concretely. We must go back and lay bare in their temp ~al 
meaning the ontological structures of Dasein which we have previc y 
obtained. Everydayness reveals itself as a mode of temporality. Be v 
‘hus recapitulating our preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein e 


1 ‘Zu-Ende-sein’. This expression is to be distinguished from “Sein-zum-Ende’, v. . ch 
we shall translate as "Being-towards-the-end'. | 


276 Being and Time Ii 


will at the same time make the phenomenon of temporality itself more 
transparent. In terms of temporality, it then becomes intelligible why 
Dasein is, and can be, historical in the basis of its Being, and why, as 
historical, it can develop historiology. 

If temporality makes up the primordial meaning of Dasein’s Being, 
and if moreover this entity is one for which, in its Being, this very Being is 
an issue, then care must use ‘time’ and therefore must reckon with ‘time’. - 
‘Time-reckoning’ is developed by Dasein’s temporality. The ‘time’ which 
is experienced in such reckoning is that phenomenal aspect of temporality 
which is closest to us. Out of it arises the ordinary everyday understanding 
of time. And this understanding evolves into the traditional conception 
of time. 

By casting light on the source of the ‘time’ ‘in which’ entities within- 
the-world are encountered—time as “‘within-time-ness’’—we shall make 
manifest an essential possibility of the temporalizing of temporality. 
Therewith the understanding prepares itself for an even more primordial 
temporalizing of temporality. In this? is grounded that understanding of 
Being which is constitutive for the Being of Dasein. Within the horizon 
of time the projection of a meaning of Being in general can be accom- 
plished. 

Thus the investigation coraprised in the division which lies before us 
will now traverse the following stages: Dascın’s possibility of Being-a- 
whole, and Being-towards-death {Chapter 1); Dasein’s attestation of an 
authentic putentialiiy-for-Being, and resoluteness (Chapter 2); Dasein’s 
authentic votentiality-for-Be-ng-a whole, and temporality as the onto- 
logical ancaning of care (Chapter 3); temporality and everydayness 
(Chapter 4); temporality and histcricality (Chapter 5); temporality 
and within-time-ness as the source of the ordinary conception of time 
(Chapter 6) 

1 ‘Die Aufheilung des Ursprungs der “Zeit”, “in der” innerweluiches Seiendes beger- 
net, der Zeit als Innerzzitigkeit, offenbart cine wsserhafie Zeisizungsmigelichkeit dev 
Zeitlichkeit.” On ‘zeitigen’ <te SI. 304 below. 


2 ‘In ihr .. it is noi clear whether the pronchn ‘ihr’ refers to "Zeiügung’ (‘ivem- 
poralizizg> cr "Zeitlicnkeit’ (temporality). 


I 


DASEIN’S POSSIBILITY OF BEING-A-WHOLE, AND 
BEING-TOWARDS-DEATH 


" 46. The Seeming Impossibility of Getting Dasein’s Being-a-whole into our Grasp 
Ontologically and Determining tts Character 

THE inadequacy of the hermeneutical Situation from which the preceding 
anaiysis of Dasein has arisen, must be surmounted. It is necessary for us 
to bring the whole Dasein into our fore-having. We must accordingly ask 
wiiether this entity, as something existing, can ever become accessible in 
its Being-a-whole. In Dasein’s very state of Being, there are important 
reasons which seem to speak against the possibility of having it presented 
i Vorgabe] in the manner required. 

The possibility of this entity’s Being-a-whole is manifestly inconsistent 
with the ontological meaning of care, and care is that which forms the 
totality of Dasein’s structural whole. Yet the primary item in care is 
the ‘ahead-of-itself’, and this means that in every case Dasein exists for the 
sake of itself. ‘As long as it is’, right to its end, it comports itself towards its 
potentiality-for-Being.. Even when it süll exists but has nothing more 
‘before it’ and has ‘settled [abgeschlossen] its account’, its Being is stiil 
determined by the ‘ahcad-of-itsell”. Hopelessress, for instance, does not 


tear Dasein away from its possibilities, but is oniy one of its own modes or 


Being towards these possibilities. Even when one is without Illusions and 
‘is ready for anything’ [‘‘Gefasstsein auf Alies’’], here too the ‘ahead-oi- 
itself’ hes hidden. The ‘ahead-of-itseif’, as an item in the structure of care, 
tells us unambiguously that in Dasein there is always something stili 
outstandtng,! which, as a potentiality-for-Being for Dasein itself, has not 
yet become ‘actual’. It is essential to the basic constitution of Dasein thai 
there is constantly something still to be settled [eine ständige Unabgeschlossenheit]. 
Such a lack of totality signifies that there is something still outstanding in 
one’s potentiality-for-Being. un 


-41 *, . . im Dasein immer noch etwas aussieht . . .' The verb ‘ausstehen’ and the noun 
*Ausstand’ (which we usually translate as ‘something still outstanding’, etc.), are ordin- 
arily used in German to apply to a debt or a bank deposit which, from the point of new 
of the lender or depositor, bas yet to be repaid to him, liquidated, or withdrawn. 


236 


237 


280 Being and Time II. ı 


But as soon as Dasein ‘exists’ in such a way that absolutely nothing 
more is still outstanding in it, then it has already for this very reason 
become ‘‘no-longer-Being-there” [Nicht-mehr-da-sein]. Its Being is 
annihilated when what is still outstanding in its Being has been liquidated. 
As long as Dasein is as an entity, it has never reached its ‘wholeness’.1 
But if it gains such ‘wholeness’, this gain becomes the utter loss of Being- 


t in-the-world. In such a case, it can never again be experienced as an entity. 


The reason for the impossibility of experiencing Dasein ontically as a 
whole which is [als seiendes Ganzes], and therefore of determining its 
character ontologically in its Being-a-whole, does not lie in any imperfec- 
tion of our cognitive powers. The hindrance lies rather in the Being of this 
entity. That which cannot ever be such as any experience which pretends 
to get Dasein in its grasp would claim, eludes in principle any possibility 
of getting experienced at all.* But in that case is it not a hopeless under- 
taking to try to discern in Dasein its ontological totality of Being? 

We cannot cross out the ‘ahead-of-itself’ as. an essential item in the 
structure of care. But how sound are the conclusions which we have drawn 
from this? Has not the impossibility of getting the whole of Dasein into 
our grasp been inferred by an argument which is merely formal? Or have 
we not at bottom inadvertently posited that Dasein is something present- 
at-hand, ahead of which something that is not yet present-at-hand is 
constantly shoving itself? Have we, in our argument, taken “‘Being-not- 
yet” and the ‘ahead?’ in a sense that is genuinely existential? Has our talk 
of the ‘end’ and ‘totality’ been phenomenally appropriate to Dasein? 
Has the expression ‘death’ had a biological signification or one that is 
existential-ontological, or indeed any signification that has been ade- 
quately and surely delimited ? Have we indeed exhausted all the possibili- 
ties for making Dasein accessible in its wholeness ? 

We must answer these questions before the problem of Dasein’s totality 
can be dismissed as nugatory [nichtiges]. This question—both the exis- 
tentiell question of whether a potentiality-for-Being-a-whole is possible, 
and the existential question of the state-of-Being of ‘end’ and ‘totality’— 
is one in which there lurks the task of giving a positive analysis for some 
phenomena of existence which up till now have been left aside. In the 
centre of these considerations we have the task of characterizing ontologic- 
ally Dasein’s Being-at-an-end and of achieving an existential conception 

3 ‘Die Behebung des Seinsausstandes besagt Vernichtung seines Seins. Solange das 
Dasein als Seiendes ist, hat es seine “Gänze” nie erreicht.’ verb ‘beheben’ is used 
in the sense of closing one’s account or liquidating it by withdrawing money from the 
bank. The noun ‘Gänze’, which we shall translate as ‘wholeness’, is to be distinguished 
from ‘Ganze’ (“whole’, or occasionally ‘totality’) and ‘Ganzheit’ (‘totality’). 


3 ‘Was so gar nicht erst sein kann, wie cin Erfahren das Dasein zu erfassen prätendiert, 
entzieht sich grundsätzlich einer Erfahrbarkeit.’ 


I. 1 Being and Time 281 


of death. The investigations relating to these topics are divided up 
as follows: the possibility of experiencing the death of Others, and the 
possibility of getting a whole Dasein into our grasp (Section 47); that 
which is still outstanding, the end, and totality (Section 48); how the 
existential analysis of death is distinguished from other possible Interpre- 
tations of this phenomenon (Section 49); a preliminary sketch of the 
existential-ontological structure of death (Section 50); Being-towards- 
death and the everydayness of Dasein (Section 51); everyday Being- 
towards-death, and the full existential conception of death (Section 52); 
an existential projection of an authentic Being-towards-death (Section 53). 


T 47. The Possibility of Experiencing the Death of Others, and the Possibility of 
Getting a Whole Dasein into our Grasp 


When Dasein reaches its wholeness in death, it simultaneously loses the 
Being of its “‘there”. By its transition to no-longer-Dasein [Nichtmehr- 
dasein], it gets lifted right out of the possibility of experiencing this 
transition and of understanding it as something experienced. Surely this 
sort of thing is denied to any particular Dasein in relation to itself. But 
this makes the death of Others more impressive. In this way a termination 
[Beendigung] of Dasein becomes “Objectively’ accessible. Dasein can 
thus gain an experience of death, all the more so because Dasein is essen- 
tially Being with Others. In that case, the fact that death has been thus 
‘Objectively’ given must make possible an ontological delimitation of 
Dasein’s totality. 

Thus from the kind of Being which Dasein possesses as Being with one 
another, we might draw the fairly obvious information that when the Dasein 
of Others has come to an end, it might be chosen as a substitute theme for 
our analysis of Dasein’s totality. But does this lead us to our appointed 
goal? 

Even the Dasein of Others, when it has reached its wholeness in death, 
is no-longer-Dasein, in the sense of Being-no-longer-in-the-world. Does 
not dying mean going-out-of-the-world, and losing one’s Being-ın-the- 
world? Yet when someone has died, his Being-no-longer-in-the-worid {if 
we understand it in an extreme way) is still a Being, but in the sense vi the 
Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more of a corporeal Thing which we 
encounter. In the dying of the Other we can experience that remar*::ble 


phenomenon of Being which may be defined as the change-over -: = an 
entity from Dasein’s kind of Being (or life) to no-longer-Dasci. 7; : 
of the entity qua Dasein i is the beginning of the same entity qua sane ne 


present-at-hand. 
However, in this way of Interpreting the change-over from Dasein te 


238 


282 Being and Time IL. ı 


ve 


Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more, the phenomenal content is.. 


missed, inasmuch as in the entity which still remains we are not presented 
with a mere corporeal Thing. From a theoretical point of view, even the 
corpse which is present-at-hand is still a possible object for the student of 
pathological anatomy, whose understanding tends to be oriented to the 
idea of life. This something which is just-present-at-hand-and-no-more is 
‘more’ than a lifeless material Thing. In it we encounter something 
unalives which has lost its life.! : 

But even this way of characterizing that which still remains [des Noch- 
verbleibenden] does not exhaust the full phenomenal findings with regard 
to Dasein. 

The ‘deceased’ [Der “Verstorbene”] as distinct from the dead person 
[dem Gestorbenen], has been torn away from those who have ‘remained 
behind’ [den “‘Hinterbliebenen’’], and is an object of ‘concor in the 
ways of funeral rites, interment, and. the cult of graves. And that is so 
because the deceased, in his kind of Being, is ‘still more’ than just an item 
of equipment, environmentally ready-to-hand, about which cae can be 
concerned, In tarrying alongside him in their mourning and cerswemora- 
tion, those who have remained behind are with him, in a mode nf res nectfur 
solicitude. Thus the relationship-of-Being which one has daa vie the: Sead 
is not to bt taken aga concernful Being-alongsids semething rests tp nvt, 

In such Reing-with the dead [dem Toten}, the ee Fin eis 20 
longer facticaily ‘there’, However, when we speak of “Being wi”, we 
alway: have in view Being with one another in the same yeorst. The 
deceased has abandoned our ‘world’ and left it behind. But is “urns of 
that world | Aus thr her] those who remain can still be with him. 

The greater the phenomenal appropriateness with which we take the 
vo-longer-Dasein of the deceased, the more plainly is it shown that in 
such Being-with the dead, the authentic Being-come-to-an-end [Zuen- 
degekommensein} cf the deceased is precisely the sort of thing which we 
do net experience, Death dors indeed reveal! itself as a loss, but s less such 
as is experienced by those who remain, In suffering this loss, however, 
we have no way of access to the loss-of-Being as such which the dying 
man ‘suffers’, The dying of Others is not something which we experience 4 
in a genuine sense; at most we are always just ‘there alongside’.? 

And éven if, by thus Being there alongside, it were possible and rie 


2 


1 ‘Das Nur-noch-Vorhandene ist “mehr” als ein leblases matericlles Ding. Mi I; 


begegnet ein des Lebens verlustig gegangenes Unlebendiges.’ 


2°. sind... “dabei”. Literally the verb ‘dabeisein’ means si nich gi to be at that * 
place’, ‘to be there alongside’; Eut it also has other connotations wh ve an ironical 


touch to this passage, for it may also mean, ‘to be engaged in’ some u ‘to be at it’ oa 


‘to be in the swim’, ‘to be ready to be “counted in” ’. 


Ihr Being and Time 283 


for us to make plain to ourselves ‘psychologically’ the dying of Others, 
„this would by no means let us grasp the way-to-be which we would then 
‚have in mind—namely, coming-to-an-end. We are asking about the 
‘ ontologicel meaning of the dying of the person who dies, as a possibility- 
of-Being which belongs to his Being. We are not asking about the way in 
which the deceased has Dasein-with or is still-a-Dasein [Nochdaseins] 
with those who are left behind. If death as experienced in Others is what 
we are enjoined to take as the theme for our analysis of Dasein’s end and 
totality, this cannot give us, either ontically or ontologically, what it 
presumes to give. 

But above all, the suggestion that the dying of Others is a substitute 
theme for the ontological analysis of Dasein’s totality and the settling of 
its account, rests on & presupposition which demonstrably fails altogether? 
to recognize Dasein’s xind of Being. This is what one presupposes when 
one is of the opion That any Dasein may be substituted for another at 
random, so “hat wrat cannot be experienced in one’s own Dasein is 
accessible in that of a stranger. But is this presupposition actually so 
baseless? 

Indisputahly, the fact that onc Dasein can be represented? by znother 
belongs to its possibilities of Being in Being-with->ar-another in the world. 
In everyday concern, censiant and maniicld useis made of suck. represent- 
ability, Whenever we ve anywhere ov have anything to contributes, we can 
be represented by sorazons within the range of that ‘environment’ with 
which we are most cisely concerned. The Iweat multiplicity of ways of 
Reing-in-the-world in which ene person cen be represented by another, 
not only extends to the more refined modes cf publicly being with one 

another, but is ikewise germane | tc those possi] bailtics of concern which 
are restricted within definite ranges, and which are cut to the measure of 
one’s occupation, one’s social status, or one’s age. But the very meaning 
of such representation is such that it is always a representation ‘in’ [“in” 
vad bei] something —that is to say, in concerning oneself with something. 
Bul proximally and for the most part everyday Dasein understands itself 
in terms of that with witch it is customarily concerned. “One is’ what one 
does. In relation to this sort of Being (the everyday manner in which we 
join with one another in absorption in the ‘world’ of our concern) 
representability i is not only quite possible but is even constitutive for our 


ae 


_ 1°, . eine völlige Verkennung , . .’ The older editions have ‘totale’ rather than 
fyfillige’. 
% 'Vertretbarkeit’. The verb 'vertreten’ means ‘to represent! in the sense of ‘deputizing’ 
for someone. It should be-neted that the verb ‘vorstellen’ is also sometimes translated as 
3, ‘to represent’, but in the quite different sense of ‘affording a “representation” or “idea” 
of something’. 


240 


241 


284 Being and Time II. 1 


being with one another. Here one Dasein can and must, within certain 
limits, ‘be’ another Dasein. 

However, this possibility of representing breaks down completely if the 
issue is one of representing that possibility-of-Being which makes up 
Dasein’s coming to an end, and which, as such, gives to it its wholeness. 
No one can take the Othe:’s dying away from him. Of course someone can ‘go to 
his death for another’. But that always means to sacrifice oneself for the 
Other ‘in some definite affair’. Such “dying for” can never signify that the 
Other has thus had his death taken away in even the slightest degree. 
Dying is something that every Dasein itself must take upon itself at the 
time. By its very essence, death is in every case mine, in so far as it ‘is’ at 
all. And indeed death signifies a peculiar possibility-of-Being in which 
the very Being of one’s own Dasein is an issue. In dying, it is shown that 
mineness and existence are ontologically constitutive for death.! Dying is 
not an event; it is a phenomenon to be understood existentially ; and it is 
to be understood in a distinctive sense which must be still more closely 
delimited. 

But if ‘ending’, as dying, is constitutive for Dasein’s totality, then the 
Being of this wholeness itself must be conceived as an existential pheno- 
menon of a Dasein which is in each case one’s own. In ‘ending’, and in 
Dasein’s Being-a-whole, for which such ending is constitutive, there is, 
by its very essence, no representing. These are the facts of the case exist- 
entially; one fails to recognize this when one interposes the expedient of 
making the dying of Others a substitute theme for the analysis of totality. 

So once again the attempt to make Dasein’s Being-a-whole accessible 
in a way that is appropriate to the phenomena, has broken down. But our 
deliberations have not been negative in their outcome; they have been 
oriented by the phenomena, even if only rather roughly. We have 
indicated that death is an existential phenomenon. Our investigation is 
thus forced into a purely existential orientation to the Dasein which is in 
every case one’s own. The only remaining possibility for the analysis of 
death as dying, is either to form a purely existential conception of this 
phenomenon, or else to forgo any ontological understanding of it. 

When we characterized the transition from Dasein to no-longer- 
Dasein as Being-no-longer-in-the-world, we showed further that Dasein’s 
going-out-of-the-world in the sense of dying must be distinguished from 
the going-out-of-the-world of that which merely has life [des Nur-leben- 
den]. In our terminology the ending of anything that is alive, is denoted 
as “perishing’’ [Verenden]. We can see the difference only if the kind 
of ending which Dasein can have is distinguished from the end of a life.1! 
Of course “dying” may also be taken physiologically and biologically. 


II. 1 Being and Time 285 


But the medical concept of the ‘exitus? does not coincide with that of 
“perishing”. 

From the foregoing discussion of the ontological possibility of getting 
death into our grasp, it becomes clear at the same time that substructures 
of entities with another kind of Being (presence-at-hand or life) thrust 
themselves to the fore unnoticed, and threaten to bring confusion to the 
Interpretation of this phenomenon—even to the frst suitable way of 
presenting it. We can encounter this phenomenon only by seeking, for our 
further analysis, an ontologically adequate way of defining the phenomena 
which are constitutive for it, such as “end” and ‘‘totality’’. 


T 48. That which is Still Outstanding; the End; Totality 


Within the framework of this investigation, our ontological character- 
ization of the end and totality can be only provisional. To perform this 
task adequately, we must not only set forth the formal structure of end in 
general and of totality in general; we must likewise disentangle the struc- 
tural variations which are possible for them in different realms—that is to 
say, deformalized variations which have been put into relationship respec- 
tively with definite kinds of entities as ‘subject-matter’, and which have 
had their character Determined in terms of the Being of these entities. 
This task, in turn, presupposes that a sufficiently unequivocal and positive 
Interpretation shall have been given for the kinds of Being which require 
that the aggregate of entities be divided into such realms, But if we are 
to understand these ways of Being, we need a clarified idea of Being in 
general. The task of carrying out in an appropriate way the ontological 
analysis of end and totality breaks down not only because the theme is so 
far-reaching, but because there is a difficulty in principle: to master this 
task successfully, we must presuppose that precisely what we are seeking 
in this investigation—the meaning of Being in. general—is something 
which we have found already and with which we are quite familiar. 

In the following considerations, the ‘variations’ in which we are chiefly 
interested are those of end and totality; these are ways in which Dasein 
gets a definite character ontologically, and as such they should lead to a 
primordial Interpretation of this entity. Keeping constantly in view the 
existential constitution of Dasein already set forth, we must try to decide 
how inappropriate to Dasein ontologically are those conceptions of end 
and totality which first thrust themselves to the fore, no matter how 
categorially indefinite they may remain. The rejection [Zuriickweisung] 
of such concepts must be developed into a positive assignment [Zuweisung] 
of them to their specific realms. In this way our understanding of end and 
totality in their variant forms as existentialia will be strengthened, and this 


242 


286 Being and Time - Hi 


will guarantee the possibility of an ontological Interpretation of death. 

But even if the analysis of Dasein’s end and totality takes on so broad 
an orientation, this cannot mean that the existential conccpts of end and 
totality are to be obtained by way of a deduction. On the contrary, the 
existential meaning of Dasein’s coming-to-an-end must be taken from 
Dasein itself, and we must show how such ‘ending’ can constitute Being- 
a-whole for the entity which exists. 

We may formulate in three theses the discussion of death up to this 
point: r. there belongs to Dasein, as long as it is, a ‘‘not-yet” which it 
will be—that which is constantly still outstanding; 2. the coming-to-its-end 
of what-is-not-yet-at-an-end (in which what is still outstanding is liquid- 
ated as regards its Being) has the character of no-longer-Dasein ; 3. coming- 
to-an-end implies a mode of Being in which the particular Dasein simply 
cannot be represented by someone else. tie 

In Dasein there is undeniably a constant ‘lack of totality’ which finds 
an end with death, This “not-yet’’ ‘belongs’ to Dasein as long as it is; 
this is how things stand phenomenally. Is this to be Interpreted as stil 
outstanding?! With relation to what entities do we talk about that which 
is still outstanding? When we use this expression we have in view that 
which indeed ‘belongs’ to an entity, but is still missing. Outstanding, as a 
way of being missing, it grounded upon a belonging-to.? For instance, the 
remainder yet to be received when a debt is to be balanced off, is still 
outstanding. That which is still outstanding is not yet at one’s disposal. 
When the ‘debt’ gets paid off, that which is still outstanding gets liquid- 
ated; this signifies that the money ‘comes in’, or, in other words, that the 
remainder comes successively along. By this procedure the “‘not-yet”’ gets 
filled up, as it were, until the sum that is owed is “all together”. There- 
fore, to be still outstanding means that what belongs together is not yet 
all together. Ontologically, this implies the un-readiness-to-hand of those 
portions which have yet to be contributed. These portions have the same 
kind of Being as those which are ready-to-hand already; and the latter, 
for their part, do not have their kind of Being modified by having the 
remainder come in. Whatever ‘“‘lack-of-togetherness” remains [Das beste- 
hende Unzusammen] gets “paid off’ by a cumulative piecing-together. 
Entities for which anything is still outstanding have the kind of Being of something 

1 ‘Aber darf der phänomenale Tatbestand, dass zum Dasein, solange es ist, dieses 
Noch-nicht “gehört”, als Ausstand interpretiert werden ?’ The contrast between ‘Tatbest- 
and’ and ‘Ausstand’ is perhaps intentional. 

® Ausstehen als Fehlen gründet in einer Zugehörigkeit.’ 

3 “Tilgung der “Schuld” als Behebung des Ausstandes bedeutet das “Eingehen”, das 
ist Nacheinanderankommen des Restes, wodurch das Noch-nicht gleichsam aufgefüllt 
nn. bis die geschuldete Summe “beisammen” ist.’ On ‘Schuld’ see note 1, p. 325, 


t 
a 


II. ı Being and Time 287 
ready-to-hand,. The togetherness [Das-Zusammen] is characterized as a 
“sum”, and so is that lack-of-togetherness which is founded upon it. 

But this lack-of-togetherness which belongs to such a mode of together- 
ness—this being-missing as still-outstanding—cannot by any means define 
ontologically that “‘not-yet’’ which belongs to Dasein as its possible death. 
Dasein does not have at all the kind of Being of something ready-to-hand- 
within-the-world. ‘The togetherness of an entity of the kind which Dasein 
is ‘in running its course’ until that ‘course’ has been completed, is not 
constituted by a ‘continuing’ piecing-on of entities which, somehow and 
somewhere, are ready-to-hand already in their own right.? 

That Dasein should be together only when its “‘not-yet”’ has been filled 
up is so far from the case that it is precisely then that Dasein is no longer. 
Any Dasein always exists in just such a manner that its ‘‘not-yet” belongs 
to it. But are there not entities which are as they are and to which a 
““not-yet” can be:oug, but which do not necessarily have Dasein’s kind 
of Being? 

For instance, we can say, “The last quarter is still outstanding until 
the moon gets full”. ‘Che “‘not-yet” diminishes as the concealing shadow 
disappears. But here the moon is always present-at-hand as a whole 
already. Leaving aside the fact that we can never get the moon wholly in 
our grasp even when it is full, this ‘‘not-yet’’ does not in any way signify 
a not-yet-Being-together of the parts which belongs to the moon, but 
pertains only to the way we get it in our grasp perceptually. The ‘“‘not-yet”’ 
which belongs to Dasein, however, is not just something which is pro- 
visionally and occasionally inaccessible to one’s own experience or even 
to that of a stranger; it ‘is’ not yet ‘actual’ at all. Our problem does not 
pertain to getting into our grasp the “‘not-yet’ which is of the character of 
Dasein; it pertains to the possible Being or not-Being of this ““not-yet”. 
Dasein must, as itself, become—that is to say, be—what it is not yet. Thus 
if we are to be able, by comparison, to define that Being of the “not-yet” 
which is of the character of Dasein, we must take into consideration entities 
to whose kind of Being becoming belops. 

When, for instance, a fruit is unripe, it “goes towards” its ripeness. 
In this process of ripening, that which the fruit is not yet, is by no means 
picced on as something not yet present-at-hand. The fruit brings itself to 
ripeness, and such a bringing of itself is a characteristic of its Being as a 
fruit. Nothing imaginable which one might contribute to it, would elimi- 
nate the unripeness of the fruit, if this entity did not come to ripeness of its 


1 ‘Throughout this sentence Heidegger uses words derived from the verb ‘laufen’, ‘to 
run’. Thus, ‘in running its course’ represents ‘in seinem Verlauf’, ‘ “its course” has been 
completed’ represents ‘es “seinem Lauf” vollendet hat’; ‘continuing’ represents ‘fort- 
laufende’. 


243 


244 


288 Being and Time II. ı 


own accord. When we speak of the “not-yet’’ of the unripeness, we do not 
have in view something else which stands outside [aussenstehendes], and 
which-—with utter indifference to the fruit—might be present-at-hand in 
it and with it. What we have in view is the fruit itself in its specific kind 
of Being. The sum which is not yet complete is, as something ready-to- 
hand, ‘a matter of indifference’ as regards the remainder which is lacking 
and un-ready-to-hand, though, taken strictly, it can neither be indifferent 
to that remainder nor not be indifferent to it.! The ripening fruit, how- 
ever, not only is not indifferent to its unripeness as something other than 
itself, but it is that unripeness as it ripens. The “not-yet”’ has already been 
included in the very Being of the fruit, not as some random characteristic, 
but as something constitutive. Correspondingly, as long as any Dasein is, 
it too is already tts “‘not-yet? Ail 

That which makes up the ‘lack of totality’ in Dasein, the constant 
“ahead-of-itself”, is neither something still outstanding in a summative 
togetherness, nor something which has not yet become accessible. It is a 
“not-yet’’ which any Dasein, as the entity which it is, has to be. Never- 
theless, the comparison wiih the unripeness of the fruit shows essential 
differences, although there is a certain agreement. If we take note of these 
differences, we shall recognize how indefinite our talk about the end and 
ending has hitherto been. 

Ripening is the specific Being of the fruit. It is also a kind of Being of the 
“not-yet”. (of unripeness); and, as such a kind of Being, it is formally 
analogous to Dasein, in that the latter, like the former, is in every case 
already its “'nöt-yet” in a sense still to be defined. But even then, this does 
not signify that ripeness as an ‘end’ and death as an ‘end’ coincide with 
regard to their ontological structure as ends. With ripeness, the fruit 
fulfils itself.? But is the death at which Dasein arrives, a fulfilment in this 
sense? With its death, Dasein has indeed ‘fulfilled its course’. But in doing 
so, has it necessarily exhausted its specific possibilities? Rather, are not 
these precisely what gets taken away from Dasein? Even ‘unfulfilled’ 
Dasein ends. On the other hand, so little is it the case that Dasein comes 
to its ripeness only with death, that Dasein may well have passed its 
ripeness before the end.* For the most part, Dasein ends in unfulfilment, 
or else by having disintegrated and been used up. 


1 ‘Die noch nicht volle Summe ist als Zuhandenes gegen den fehlenden unzuhandenen 
Rest “gleichgültig”. Streng genommen kann sie weder ungleichgültig, noch gleichgültig 
dagegen sein.’ 

‘Mit der Reife vollendet sich die Frucht.’ Notice that the verb ‘vollenden’, which we 
here translate as ‘fulfil’, involves the verb ‘enden’ (‘to end’). While ‘vollenden’ may mean 
‘to bring fully to an end’ or ‘to terminate’, it may also mean ‘to complete’ or ‘to perfect’. 

3 While we have translated ‘Reife’ by its cognate ‘ripeness’, this word applies generally 
to almost any kind of maturity, even that of Dasein—not merely the maturity of fruits 
and vegetables, 


II. ı Being and Time 289 


Ending does not necessarily mean fulfilling oneself. It thus becomes 
more ürgent to ask in what sense, if any, death must be conceived as the ending 
of Dasein, 

In the first instance, “ending” signifies “stopping”, and it signifies this 
in senses which are ontologically different. The rain stops. It is no longer 
present-at-hand. The road stops. Such an ending does not make the road 
disappear, but such a stopping is determinative for the road as this one, 
which is present-at-hand. Hence ending, as stopping, can signify either 
‘‘passing over into non-presence-at-hand” or else ‘‘Being-present-at-hand 
only when the end comes”. The latter kind of ending, in turn, may either 
be determinative for something which is present-at-hand in an unfinished 
way, as a road breaks off when one finds it under construction; or it may 
rather constitute the ‘finishedness” of something present-at-hand, as the 
painting is finished with the last stroke of the brush. 

But ending as “getting finished” does not include fulfilling. On: the 
other hand, whatever has got to be fulfilled must indeed reach the finished- 
ness that is possible for it. Fulfilling is a mode of ‘finishedness’, and is 
founded upon it. Finishedness is itself possible only as a determinate form 
of something present-at-hand or ready-to-hand. 

Even ending in the sense of “disappearing” can still have its modifica- 
tions according to the kind of Being which an entity may have. The rain 
is at an end—that is to say it has disappeared. The bread is at an end— 
that is to say, it has been used up and is no longer available as something 
ready-to-hand. 

"By none of these modes of ending can death be suitably characterized as the “end” 
of Dasein. If dying, as Being-at-an-end, were understood in the sense of an 
ending of the kind we have discussed, then Dasein would thereby be 
treated as something present-at-hand or ready-to-hand. In death, Dasein 
has not been fulfilled nor has it simply disappeared; it has not become 
finished nor is it wholly at one’s disposal as something ready-to-hand. 

On the contrary, just as Dasein is already its “‘not-yet”, and is its 
““not-yet”’ constantly as long as it is, it 7s already its end too. The “ending” 
which we have in view when we speak of death, does not signify Dasein’s 
Being-at-an-end [Zu-Ende-sein], but a Being-towards-the-end [Sein zum 
Ende] of this entity. Death is a way to be, which Dasein takes over as soon 


as it is. “As soon as man comes to life, he is at once old enough to die.’!V_ 


Ending, as Being-towards-the-end, must be clarified ontologically in 
terms of Dasein’s kind of Being. And presumably the possibility of an 
existent Being of that ‘‘not-yet’’ which lies ‘before’ the ‘end’, will become 


1‘... die Möglichkeit eines existierenden Seins des Noch-nicht, das “vor” dem “Ende” 
liegt . . .’ The earlier editions have ‘. . . das ja “vor” dem “Ende”... .’ 


245 


» 246 


290 Being and Time II. ı 


intelligible only if the character of ending has been determined exist- 
entially. The existential clarification of Being-towards-the-end will also 
give us for the first time an adequate basis for defining what can possibly 
be the meaning of our talk about a totality of Dasein, if indeed this totality 
is to be constituted by death as the ‘end’, 

Our attempt to understand Dasein’s totality by taking as our point 
of departure a clarification of the “'not-yet” and going on to a character- 
ization of “ending”, has not led us to our goal. It has shown only in a 
negalive way that the “not-yet” which Dasein in every case is, resists 
Interpretation as something still outstanding. The end towards which 
Dasein is as existing, remains inappropriately defined by the notion of a 
‘‘Being-at-an-end’’, These considerations, however, should at the same 
time make it plain that they must be turned back in their course. A posi- 
tive characterization of the phenomena in question (Being-not-yet, 
ending, totality) succeeds only when it is unequivocally oriented to Dasein’s 
state of Being. But if we have any insight into the realms where those end- 
structures and totality-structures which are to be construed ontologically 
with Dasein belong, this will, in a negative way, make this unequivocal 
character secure against wrong turnings. 

_ If we are to carry out a positive Interpretation of death and its character 


as an end, by way of existential analysis, we must take as our clue the 
basic state of Dasein at which we have already arrived—the phenomenon 


of care, 


“| 49. How the Existential Analysis of Death is Distinguished from Other Possible 
Interpretations of this Phenomenon 


The. unequivocal character of our ontological Interpretation of death 
must first be strengthened by our bringing explicitly to mind what such 
an Toterpretation can not inquire about, and what it would be vain to 
expect it to give us any information or instructions about.! 

Death, in the widest sense, is a phenomenon of life. Life must be under- 
stood as a kind of Being to which there belongs a Being-in-the-wörld. 
Only if this kind of Being is oriented in a privative way to Dasein, can 
we fix its character ontologically. Even Dasein may be considered purely 
as life. When the question is formulated from the viewpoint of biology and 
physiology, Dasein moves into that domain of Being which we know as the 
world of animals and plants. In this field, we can obtain data and statistics 
about the longevity of plants, animals and men, and we do this by ascer- 
taining them ontically. Connections between longevity, propagation, and 


2‘... wonach diese nicht fragen, und worüber eine Auskunft und Anweisung von ihr 
vergeblich erwartet werden kann.’ The older editions have ‘kann’ after““fragen’, and 
‘muss’ where the newer editions have ‘kann’. 


II. 1 Being and Time 391 


growth may be recognized. The ‘kinds’ of death, the causes, ‘contrivances’ 
and ways in which it makes its entry, can be explored.¥ 

Underlying this biological-ontical exploration of death is a problematic 
that is ontological. We still have to ask how the ontological essence of 
‘death is defined in terms of that of life. In a certain way, this has always 
been decided already in the ontical investigation of death. Such investiga- 
tions operate with preliminary conceptions of life and death, which have 
been more or less clarified. These preliminary conceptions need to be 
sketched out by the ontology of Dasein. Within the ontology of Dasein, 
which is superordinaie to an ontology of life, the existential analysis of death 
is, in turn, subordinaie to a characterization of Dasein’s basic state. The 
ending of that which lives we have called ‘perishing’. Dasein too ‘has’ its 
death, of the kind appropriate to anything that lives; and it has it, not in 
ontical isolation, but as codetermined by its primordial kind of Being. 
In so far as this is the case, Dasein too can end without authentically 
dying, though on the other hand, gua Dasein, it does not simply perish. 
We designate this intermediate phenomenon as its ‘‘demise’’.! Let the term 
““dying” stand for that way of Being in which Dasein is towards its death.? 
Accordingly we must say that Dasein never perishes. Dasein, however, 
can demise only as long as it is dying. Medical and biological investiga- 
tion into ‘‘demising”’ can obtain results which may even become significant 
ontologically if the basic orientation for an existential Interpretation of 
death has been made secure. Or must sickness and death in general— 
even from a medical point of view—be primarily conceived as existential 
phenomena? 

The existential Interpretation of death takes precedence over any 
biology and ontology of life. But it is also the foundation for any investiga- 
tion of death which is biographical or historiological, ethnological or 
psychological. In any ‘typology’ of ‘dying’, as a characterization of the 
conditions under which a demise is ‘Experienced’ and of the ways in 
which it is ‘Experienced’, the concept of death is already presupposed. 
Moreover, a psychology of ‘dying’ gives information about the ‘living’ of 
the person who is ‘dying’, rather than about dying itself. This simply 
reflects the fact that when Dasein dies—and even when it dies authentically 
—it does not have to do so with an Experience of its factical demising, or 
in such an Experience. Likewise the ways in which death is taken among 


1 ‘Ableben’. This term, which literally means something like ‘living out’ one’s life, is 
used in ordinary German as a rather legalistic term for a person’s death. We shall translate 
it as ‘demise’ (both as a noun and as a verb), which also has legalistic connotations. But 
this translation is an arbitrary one, and does not adequately express the meaning which 
Heidegger is explaining. 


2°... Seinsweise, in der das Dasein zu seinem Tode ist.’ 


247 


248 


292 Being and Time I. ı 
primitive peoples, and their ways of conıy.orting themselves towards it in 
magic and cult, illuminate primaril‘ the. understanding of Dasein; but 
the Interpretation of this understanding already requires an existential 
analytic and a corresponding conception of death. 

On the other hand, in the ontological analysis of Being-towards-the- 
end there is no anticipation of our taking any existential stand towards 
death. If “death” is defined as the ‘end’ of Dasein—that is to say, of Being- 
in-the-world—this does not imply any ontical decision whether ‘after 
death’ still another Being is possible, either higher or lower, or whether 
Dasein ‘lives on’ or even ‘outlasts’ itself and is ‘immortal’. Nor is anything 
decided ontically about the ‘other-worldly’ and its possibility, any more 
than about the ‘this-worldly’ ;? it is not as if norms and rules for comporting 
oneself towards death were to be proposed for ‘edification’. But our 
analysis of death remains purely ‘this-worldly’ in so far as it Interprets 
that phenomenon merely in the way in which it enters into any particular 
Dasein as a possibility of its Being. Only when death is conceived in its full 
ontological essence can we have any methodological assurance in even asking 
what may be after death; only then can we do so with meaning and justifica- 
tion. Whether such a question is a possible theoretical question at all will 
not be decided here. The this-worldly ontological Interpretation of death 
takes precedence over any ontical other-worldly speculation. 

Finally, what might be discussed under the topic of a ‘metaphysic of 
death’ lies outside the domain of.an existential analysis of death. Questions 
of how and when death ‘came into the world’, what ‘meaning’ it can 
have and is to have as an evil and affliction in the aggregate of entities— 
these are questions which necessarily presuppose an understanding not 
only of the character of Being which belongs to death, but of the ontology 
of the aggregate of entities as a whole, and especially of the ontological 
clarification of evil and negativity in general. 

Methodologically, the existential analysis is superordinate to the ques- 
tions of a biology, psychology, theodicy, or theology of death. Taken 
ontically, the results of the analysis show the peculiar formality and empti- 
ness of any ontological characterization. However, that must not blind us 
to the rich and complicated structure of the phenomenon. If Dasein in 
general never becomes accessible as something present-at-hand, because 
Being-possible belongs in its own way to Dasein’s kind of Being, even less 
may we expect that we can simply read off the ontological structure of 
death, if death is indeed a distinctive possibility of Dasein, 

On the other hand, the analysis cannot keep clinging to an idea of death 


1 ‘Ober das “Jenseits” und seine Möglichkeit wird ebensowenig ontisch entschieden 
we über das “Diesseits” . . .’ The quotation marks around “Diesseits’”’ appear only in the 
ater editions. 


II, ı Being and Time 293 


which has been devised accidentally and at random. We can restrain this 
arbitrariness only by giving beforehand an ontological characterization of 
the kind of Being in which the ‘end’ enters into Dasein’s average every- 
dayness. To do so, we must fully envisage those structures of everydayness 
which we have earlier set forth. The fact that in an existential analysis of 
death, existentiell possibilities of Being-towards-death are consonant with 
it, is implied by the essence of all ontological investigation. All the more 
explicitly must the existential definition of concepts be unaccompanied by 
any existentiell commitments,? especially with relation to death, in which 
Dasein’s character as possibility lets itself be revealed most precisely. The 
existential problematic aims only at setting forth the ontological structure 
of Dasein’s Being-towards-the-end.! 


| 50. Preliminary Sketch of the Extstential-ontological Structure of Death 


From our considerations of totality, end, and that which is still out- 
standing, there has emerged the necessity of Interpreting the phenomenon 
of death as Being-towards-the-end, and of doing so in terms of Dasein’s 
basic state. Only so can it be made plain to what extent Being-a-whole, 
as constituted by Being towards-the-end, is possible in Dasein itself in 
conformity with the structure of its Being. We have seen that care is the 
basic state of Dasein. The ontological signification of the expression 
“care” has been expressed in the ‘definition’: “ahead-of-itself-Being- 
already-in (the world) as Being-alongside entities which we encounter 
(within-the-world)”’.v! In this are expressed the fundamental character- 
istics of Dasein’s Being: existence, in the “‘ahead-of-itself” ; ; facticity, i in the 
“Being-already-in”; falling, in the “Being-alongside”. If indeed death 
belongs in a distinctive sense to the Being of Dasein, then death (or Being- 
towards-the-end) must be defined in terms of these characteristics. 

We must, in the first instance, make plain in a preliminary sketch how 
Dasein’s existence, facticity, and falling reveal themselves in the pheno- 
menon of death. 

The Interpretation in which the “not-yet—and with it even the utter- 
most "not-yet”’, the end of Dasein—was taken in the sense of something 
still outstanding, has been rejected as inappropriate in that it included the 
ontological perversion of making Dasein something present-at-hand. 
Being-at-an-end implies existentially Being-towards-the-end. The utter- 
most “‘not-yet” has the character of something towards which Dasein 
comports itself. The end is impending [steht . . . bevor] for Dasein. Death is 
not something not yet present-at-hand, nor is it that which is ultimately 


1 ‘Um so ausdrücklicher muss mit der existenzialen Begriffsbestimmung die existen- 
zielle Unverbindlichkeit zusammengehen .. 


249 


250 


251 


294 Being and Time II. ı 
still outstanding but which has been reduced to a minimum. Death is 
something that stands before us— something impending.! 

However, there is much that can impend for Dasein as Being-in-the- 
world. The character of impendence is not distinctive of death. On the 
contrary, this Interpretation could even lead us to suppose that death 
must be understood in che sense of some impending event encountered 
environmentally. For instance, a storm, the remodelling of the house, or 
the arrival of a friend, may be impending; and these are entities which are 
respectively present-at-hand, ready-to-hand, and there-with-us. The 
death which impends does not have this kind of Being. 

But there may also be impending for Dasein a journey, for instance, or 
a disputation with Others, or the forgoing of something of a kind which 
Dasein itself can be—its own possibilities of Being, which are based on its 
Being with Others. 

Death is a possibility-of-Being which Dasein itself has to take over in 
every case. With death, Dasein stands before itself in its ownmost poten- 
tiality-for-Being. This is a possibility in which the issue is nothing less 
than Dascin’s Being-in-the-world. Its death is the possibility of no-longer 
being-able-to-be-there.? If Dasein stands before itself as this possibility, 
it has-been fully assigned to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. When it 
stands before itself in this way, all its relations to any other Dasein have 
been undone.* This ownmost non-relational* possibility is at the same 
time the uttermost one. 

As potentiality-for-Being, Dasein carmot outstrip the possibility of 
death. Death is the possibility of the absolute impossibility of Dasein. 
Thus death reveals itself as that possibility which is one’s ownmost, which is 
non-relational, and which ts not to be outstripped [untiberhcibare]. As such, death 
is something distinctively impending. Its existential possibility is based on the 
fact that Dasein is essentially disclosed to itself, and disclosed, indeed, as 
ahead-of-itself. This iternin thestructure of care has its most primordial con- 
cretion in Being-towards-death. As a phenomonon, Being-towards-the-end 


1‘... sondern eher ein Bevorstand.’ While we shall ordinarily use various forms of 
‘impend’ to translate ‘Bevorstand’, ‘bevorstehen’, etc., one must bear in mind thai the 
literal meaning of these expressions is one of ‘standing before’, so that they may be quite 
plausibly contrasted with ‘Ausstehen’, etc. (‘standing out’). Thus we shall occasionally 
use forms of ‘stand before’ when this connotation seems to be dominant. 

3 ‘Nicht-mehr-dasein-kénnens.’ Notice that the expressions 'Seinkönnen’ (our ‘poten- 
tiality-for-Being’) and ‘Nichtmehrdasein’ (our ‘no-longer-Dasein’) are here fused. Cf. 
H. 237-242. | 

3 ‘So sich bevorstehend sind in ihm alle Bezüge zu anderem Dasein gelöst.’ 

t ‘unbeziigliche’. This term appears frequently throughout the chapter, and, as the 
present passage makes clear, indicates that in death Dasein is cut off from relations with 


others. The term has accordingly been translated as ‘non-relational’, in the sense of 
‘devoid of relationships’. 


II. 1 Being and Time 295 
becomes plainer as Being towards that distinctive possibility of Dasein 
which we have characterized. 

This ownmost possibility, however, non-relational and not to be out- 
stripped, is not one which Dasein procures for itself subsequently and 
occasionally in the course of its Being. On the contrary, if Dasein exists, 
it has already been thrown into this possibility. Dasein does not, proximally 
and for the most part, have any explicit or even any theoretical knowledge 
of the fact that it has been delivered over io its death, and that death thus 
belongs to Being-in-the-world. Thrownness into death reveals itself to 
Dasein in a more primordial and impressive manner in that state-of-mind 
which we have called “anxiety”.v!l! Anxiety in the face of death is anxiety 
‘in the face of” that potentiality-for-Being which is one’s ownmost, non- 
relational, and not to be outstripped. That in the face of which one has 
anxiety is Being-in-the-world itself. That about which one has this anxiety 
is simply Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being. Anxiety in the face of death 
must not be confused with fear in the face of one’s demise. This anxiety 
is not an accidental or random mood of ‘weakness’ in some individual; 
but, as a basic state-of-mind of Dasein, it amounts to the disclosedness of 
the fact that Dasein exists as thrown Being towards its end. Thus the 
existential conception of “dying” is made clear as thrown Being towards 
its ownmaest potentiality-for-Being, which is non-relational and not to be 


outstripped. Precision is gained by distinguishing this from pure: dis- 


appearance, and also from merely perishing, and finally from the “Experi- 
encing’ of a demise.! 

Being-towards-the-end does not first arise through some attitude which 
occasionally emerges, nor does it arise as such an attitude; it belongs 
essentially to Dasein’s thrownness, which reveals itself in a state-of-mind 
(mood) in one way or another. The factical ‘knowledge’ or ‘ignorance’ 
which prevails in any Dasein as to its ownmost Being-towards-the-end, is 
only the expression of the existentiell possibility that there are different 
ways of maintaining oneself in this Being. Factically, there are many who, 
proximally and for the most part, do not know about death; but this must 
not be passed off as a ground for proving that Being-towards-death does not 
belong to Dasein ‘universally’. It only proves that proximally and for the 
most part Dasein covers up its ownmost Being-towards-death, fleeing in 
the face of it. Factically, Dasein is dying as long as it exists, but proximally 
and for the most part, it does so by way of falling. For factical existing is 
not only generally and without further differeatiation a thrown poten- 
tiality-for-Being-in-the-world, but it has always likewise been absorbed in 
the ‘world’ of its concern. In this falling Being-alongside, fleeing from 


. gegen ein “Erleben” des Ablebens.’ (Cf. Section 49 above.) 


252 


296 Being and Time i ii. 
uncanniness announces itself ; and this means now, a fleeing in the face 
of one’s ownmost Being-towards-death. Existence, facticity, ard faitine 
characterize Being-towards-the-end, and are therefore constitutive for ths- 
existential conception of death. As regards its ontological possibility, dying 75 ı 
grounded in care. | 
But if Being-towards-death belongs primordially and essentially to 
Dasein’s Being, then it must also be exhibitable in everydayness, even if 
proximally in a way which is-inauthentic.? And if Being-towards-the-end 
should afford the existential possibility of an existentiell Being-a-whole fcr 
Dasein, then this would give phenomenal confirmation for the thesis that 
“care” is the ontological term for the totality of Dasein’s structural whole. 
If, however, we are to provide a full phenomenal justification for this 
principle, a preliminary sketch of the connection between Being-towards- 
death and care is not sufficient. We must be able to see this connection 
above all in that concretion which lies closest to Dasein—its everydayness. 


{ 


q] sr. Being-towards-death and the Everydayness of Dasein 


In setting forth average everyday Being-towards-death, we must take 
our orientation from those structures of everydayness at which we have 
earlier arrived. In, Being-towards-death, Dasein comports itself towards 
itself as a distinctive potentiality-for-Being. But the he Self of everydayness is 
the “they”. ix The they”. is. constituted by. the_way things have been 


coo 


1e oe 


agcordingly mak make n manifest the > way ‘in which everyday I Dasein interprets 

i itself its Being-towards-death. The foundation of any interpretation 

is an act of understanding, which is always accompanied by a state-of- 

` mind, or, in other words, which has a mood. So we must ask how Being- 

towards-death is disclosed by the kind of understanding which, with its 

state-of-mind, lurks in the idle talk of the “they”. How does the ‘‘they”’ 

comport itself understandingly towards that ownmost possibility of Dasein, 

. which is non-relational and is not to be outstripped? What state-of-mind 

\ discloses to the “they” that it has been delivered over to death, and in 

hat way? ° 

n the publicness with wach we are with one another in’ our our everyday 

mannen death is ‘kno 


253 a ‘case of death’. > Someone or other ‘dies’, be he neighbour or stranger 
e nee 


-< D 
i 
l 
| 


1*, ,. dann muss es auch— wenngleich zunächst uneigentlich—in der Alltaglichkeit 
aufweisbar sein.’ The earlier editions have another ‘auch’ j just before ‘in der Alltaglichkeit’. 
8°, . das sich in der öffentlichen Ausgelegtheit konstituiert, die sich im Gerede auss- 


pricht.’ The earlier editions have ‘. . . konstituiert. Sie spricht sich aus im Gerede.’ 
3 ‘Die Öffentlichkeit des alltäglichen Miteinander “kennt” den Tod als ständig vor- 
kommendes Begegnis, als “Todesfall”? 


Ly 


\ K os 
ne ` 

\ X oe 
II. 1 \ 


[Nächste oder Fernerstehende]. People who are no acquaintances of ours 
are ‘dying’ daily and hourly. ‘Death’ is encountered as a well-known event 
-océurring within-the-world. As such it remains in the inconspicuousness* 
characteristic. of what is encountered in an everyday fashion. The “they” 
has already stowed away [gesichert] an interpretation for this event. It 
talks of it in a ‘fugitive’ manner, either expressly or else in a way which is 


mostly inhibited, as if to say, “One of these a one will die too, in the 


2- 


Being and Time 297 


Ee EEG a 


must ist duly arrive from somewhere or other, but which is. eag ol 
yet present-ai~hand for oneself, and is therefore no threat. The expression 


‘one dies’ spreads abroad the opinion that what gets reached, as it were, 


en — —— —— nm 


by. death, is the Te In Dasein’ s public way ofi interpreting, it is said 


Sem eee 


a Frist 


—n 


lis constantly occurring. ‘Death g gets an off as always a tue ‘actual’; 
lits character as a possibility gets concealed, and so are the other two 
items that belong to it—the fact that it is non-relatıonal and that it is not 
l be outstripped. By such ambiguity, Dasein puts itself in the position 
of losing itself in the “they” as regards a distinctive potentiality-for-Being 
which belongs to Dasein’s ownmost Self. The “they” gives its approval, 
er aggravates the temptation to cover up from oneself one’s ow-most 
Being-towards-death.*! This evasive concealment in the face of death 
Idominates everydayness so stubbornly that, in Being with one anotner, the 
‘neighbours’ often still keep talking the ‘dying person’ into the belief that 
ie will escape death and soon return to the tranquillized everydayness of 
he world of his concern. Such ‘solicitude’ is meant to ‘console’ him. It 
insists upon bringing him back into Dasein, while in addition it helps him 


| 
1*,,. man stirbt am Ende auch einmal, nn zunächst bleibt man selbst unbetroffen,.’ 
R ‘Die öffentliche Daseinsauslegung sagt: an stirbt”, weil damit jeder andere und 
man selbst sich einreden kann: je nicht ce ich; denn dieses Man ist das Niemand.’ 
While we have usually followed the convention of ‘translating the indefinite pronoun 
‘man’ as ‘one’ and the expression ‘das Man’ as ‘the “they” ’, to do so here would obscure 
the point, 


298 Being and Time l II. r 
to kesp his ownmost non-relational possibility-of-Beirz m con- . 


ceal- `. in this manner the “th 7° provides besorgt] > e fant trangutilrca- 
tion. t death. At bottom, . wer, this is © rantan) OD nO say for 
him ~ xo is ‘dying’ but just as ach for those who \; itn. coolever 
in th. ase of a demise, the : . lic is still not io ra. tran uillity 
upse: ~ such an event, or be «‘:sturbed in the carei: with which it 
conc. œ- itself! Indeed the ying of Others is ser. 9. citough as a 


socia: ...convenience, if not ever a downright tactlessnc-s against which 
the p chic is to be guarded.*- 

Bu iong with this tranquillization, which forces Da: ~ sway from its 
deat}, the ‘‘they”’ at the same time puts itself in uis .- sght-and makes 
itself v- spectable by tacitly regulating the y way inw, icky p- nas to comport. 
gnesei! 1 \owards death. It is already a matt matter of public icceptance that 
‘thinking ng, about death’ is a cowardly fear, a. a sign of inseci. „city OF on the part 
of Di. sin, and a sombre way of fleeing from the we the world. Tre “they? does 


tan eT ee a 


note mail us s the couragefor-anxiety in the face of death. The uminance.ofthe 
manr-r in which-things have heen publicly. -interpreted by the “they”, 


has already _ decided what state-of-mind is to. determine our attitude 


— 


towar.ls death. In anxiety in the face of death, Dasein is brought f face to 
face wi h itself as delivered over to that_possibility which is not to be 
outstripped. ‚ The“ they” concerns itself with transforming this anxiety into 


pe ee a 


-fear in the face of an oncoming € event, ‘In addition, the anxiety \ wW hich has 


Sao, . 


self assured-Dasein ma may, have any acquaintance, What is is Fitting’ [Was 
sich . . . “gehört”’] according to the unuttered- decree of the “they”, is 
indifferent. tranquillity as. to the-‘fact? that one dies. The cultivation of 
such a ‘superior’ indifference alienates Dasein from its ownmost non- 


relational ag no ” 


towardsden i | eing in i the of death Hein ai heen 
has the mode. on 4 it—giving new explanations for it, 
understanding it inauthentically, and concealing it. Factically one’s own 


Dasein is always dying already; that is to° say, itis in a Being-towards- 


its-end. And it-hides this Fac Fact from itsel itself by recoining. “death” as just a 


case of death” in Others—an everyday occu rrence which, if need. be, 


ee ee e et 


ete ers 
gives | us the : assurance still it agg Ba ‘oneself? is. sul ‘living’. But 


attests that the very “they” itself already has’ the ‘definite character of 


1‘Und selbst im Falle des Ablebers noch soll die Öffentlichkeit durch das Ereignis 
nicht in ihrer besorgten Sorglosigkeit gestört und ‚beunruhigt werden,” 


IY, ı Beng and Time 299 


Being-towards-death, even when it is not explicitly engaged in ‘thinking about 
death’. Even in average everydayness, this ownmost potentiality for-Being, which ts 
non-relational and not to be outstripped, is constantly an issue for Dasein. This ts 
the case when its concern is merely in the mode of an untroubled indifference towards 
the uttermost possibility of existence. 

In setting forth everyday Being-towards-death, however, we are at the 
same time enjoined to try to secure a full existential conception of Being- 
towards-the-end, by a more penetrating Interpretation in which falling 
Being-towards-death is taken as an evasion in the face of death. That in the 
face of which one flees has been made visible in a way which is phenomenally 
adequate. Against this it must be possible to project phenomenologically 
the way in which evasive Dasein itself understands its death.*!!! 


{ 52. Everyday Being-towards-the-end, and the Full Existential Conception of 
Death 

In our preliminary existential sketch, Being-towards-the-end has been 
ie rey aia one’s ownmost potentiality-for-Being, which is 
non-relational and is.not to be outstripped. Being towards this possibility, 
as a Being-which exists, is brought face to face with the absolute i impos- 
sibility of existence. Beyond this seemingly empty characterization of 
Being-towards-death, there has been revealed the concretion of this Being 
in the mode = every dayness. In accordance with the tendency to falling, 


—_—... 
ee ees 


be an evasion in the face of death—an evasion 1 which conceals. While our 
investigation has hitherto passed from a formal sketch of the ontological 


structure of death to the concrete analysis of everyday Being-towards-the- 
end, the direction is now to be reversed, and we shall arrive at the full 
existential conception of death by rounding out our Interpretation of 
everyday Being-towards-the-end. 

In explicating everyday Being-towards-death we have clung to the idle 
talk of the ‘‘they” to the effect that “one dies too, sometime, hut not right 


“away.” >? All that we have alga thus far is the ‘one dies’ ag buch. In 


‘not so not imply te ee which corre- 
sponds-te-the way death—in the sense of the distinctive possibility char- 


acterized above—enters into Dasein. Everydayness confines itself to 
a en 


1°... wenn auch nur im Modus des Besorgens einer unbehelligten Gleichg ültigkeit gegen dis 
äussersie M öglichkeit seiner Existenz.’ Ordinarily the expression ‘Gleichgültigkeit gegen’ 
means simply ‘indifference towards’. But Heidegger’ s use of boldface type suggests that 
here he also has in mind that ‘gegen’ may mean ‘against’ or ‘in opposition to’. 
. man stirbt auch einmal, aber vorläufig noch nicht.’ 


255 


256 


300 Being and Time II. 1 


conceding the ‘certainty’ of death in this ambiguous manner just in order 
to weaken that certainty by covering up dying still more and to alleviate 
its own thrownness into death. 

By its very meaning, this evasive concealment in the face of death can 
not be authentically certain’ of death, and yet it is certain of it. What are - 
we to say about the“ certainty of death’? 7 ~ 

To be certain of an ‘entity means to o hold it for true as something true.! 
But “truth” signifies the uncoveredness of some entity, and all uncovered- 
ness is grounded ontologically in the most primordial truth, the disclosed- 
ness of Dasein.*!v As an entity which is both disclosed and disclosing, and 
one which uncovers, Dasein is essentially ‘in the truth’. But certainty is 
grounded in the truth, or belongs to tt equiprimordially. The expression ‘certainty’, 


like the term ‘truth’, has a double signification. Primordially “truth” 


means the same as ““Being-disclosive”’, as a way in which Dasein behaves. 
From this comes the derivative signification: “the uncoveredness of 
entities”. Correspondingly, “‘certainty”, in its primordial signification, is 
tantamount to “Being-certain”, as œ kind of Being which belongs to 
Dasein. However, in a derivative signification, any entity of which 
Dasein can be certain will also get called something ‘certain’. 

One mode of certainty is conviction. In conviction, Dasein lets the testi- 
mony of the thing itself which has been uncovered (the true thing itself) 
be the sole determinant for its Being towards that thing understandingly.? 
Holding something for true is adequate as a way of maintaining oneself 
in the truth, if it is grounded in the uncovered entity itself, and if, as 
Being towards the entity so uncovered, it has become transparent to itself 
as regards its appropriateness to that entity. In any arbitrary fiction or in 
merely having some ‘view’ [““Ansicht’’] about an entity, this sort of thing 
is lacking. 

The adequacy of holding-for-true is measured according to the truth- 
claim to which it belongs. Such a claim gets its justification from the kind 
of Being of the entity to be disclosed, and from the direction of the dis- 
closure. The kind of truth, and along with it, the certainty, varies with 
the way entities differ, and accords with the guiding tendency and extent 
of the disclosure. Our present considerations will be restricted to an 


1 ‘Eines Seienden gewiss-sein besagt: es als wahres für wahr kalten.’ The earlier editions 
have ‘Gewisssein’ instead of ‘gewiss-sein’. Our literal but rather unidiomatic translation 
of the phrase ‘fiir wahr halten’ seems desirable in view of Heideggér’s extensive use of the 
verb ‘halten’ (‘hold’) in subsequent passages where this phrase occurs, though this is 
obscured by our ne “halten sich in ... as ‘maintain itself in...’ and “halten 
sich an...’ as ‘cling to...’ or ‘stick to. 


2 ‘In ihr lässt sich das Dasein einzig durch das Zeugnis der entdeckten (wahre) Sache 
selbst sein verstehendes Sein zu dieser bestimmen.’ The connection between ‘Oberzeu- 
gung’ (‘conviction’) and ‘Zeugnis’ (testimony) is obscured in our translation. 


II. í Being and Time gor 


analysis of Being-certain with regard to death; and this Being-certain 
will in the end present us with a distinctive certainty of Dasein. 

For the most part, everyday Dasein covers up the ownmost possibility 
of its Being—that possibility which is non-relational and not to be out- 
stripped. This factical tendency to cover up confirms our thesis that Dasein, 
as factical, is in the ‘untruth’.*” Therefore the certainty which belongs to 
such a covering-up of Being-towards-death must be an inappropriate way 
of holding-for-true, and not, for instance, an uncertainty in the sense of 
a doubting. In inappropriate certainty, that of which one is certain is 
held covered up. If ‘one’ understands death as an event which one 
encounters in one’s environment, then the certainty which is related to 
such events does not pertain to Being-towards-the-end. 

They say, “It is certain that ‘Death’ is coming.’! They say it, and the 
“they” overlooks thewlact that in order to be able to be certain of 
death, Dasein itself must in every case be certain of its ownmost non- 
relational potentiality-for-Being. They say, “Death is certain”; and 
in saying so, they implant in Dasein the illusion that it is zéself certain 
of its death. And what is the grpund of everyday Being-certain? 
Manifestly, it is not just mutual persuasion. Yet the ‘dying’ of Others 
is something that one experiences daily. Death is an undeniable ‘fact of 
experience’. 

The way in which everyday Being-towards-death understands the 
certainty which is thus grounded, betrays itself when it tries to ‘think’ 
about death, even when it does so with critical foresight—that is to say, 
in an appropriate manner. So far as one knows, all men ‘die’. Death is 
probable in the highest degree for every man, yet it isnot ‘unconditionally’ 
certain. Taken strictly, a certainty which is ‘only’ empirical may be attri- 
buted to death. Such certainty necessarily falls short of the highest 
certainty, the apodictic, which we reach in certain domains of theoretical 
knowledge. 

In this ‘critical’ determination of the certainty of death, and of its 
impendence, what is manifested in the first instance is, once again, a 
failure to recognize Dasein’s kind of Being and the Being-towards-death 
which belongs to Dasein—a failure that is characteristic of everydayness. 
The fact that demise, as an event which occurs, is ‘only’ empirically certain, is in no 
way decisive as to the certainty of death. Cases of death may be the factical 
occasion for Dasein’s first paying attention to death atall. Solong, however, 
as Dasein remains in the empirical certainty which we have mentioned, 
death, in the way that it ‘is’, is something of which Dasein can by no means 
become certain. Even though, in the publicness of the “they”, Dasein 


1 ‘Man sagt: es ist gewiss, dass “der” Tod kommt.’ 


257 


302 Being and Time 1. ı 


seems to ‘talk’ only of this ‘empirical’ certainty of death, nevertheless at 
bottom Dasein does not exclusively or primarily stick to those cases oi 
death. which merely occur. In evading its death, even everyday Being- 
towards-the-end is indeed certain of its death in another way than it 
might itself like to have true on purely theoretical considerations. This 
‘other way’ is what everydayness for the most part veils from itself. Every- 
dayness does not dare to let itself become transparent in such a manner, 
We have already characterized the every-day state-of-mind which consists 
in an air of superiority with regard to the certain ‘fact’ of death—-a super- 
iority which is ‘anxiously’ concerned while seemingly free from anxiety. 
In this state-oi-mind, everydayness acknowledges a ‘higher’ certainty than 
one which is only empirical. One knows about the certainty of death, and 
yet ‘is’ not authentically certain of one’s ewn. Th falling everydayness of 
Das-in i is acquainted with death’s certainty, anc L yet ev ades Being-certain. 
But in the light of what it evades, ‘this very. evasion attests pheromenaliy 
thai wrath must be cunceived as one’s ownmos? tpos ibility, non-relauor val, 
not ie be_cutsiripped, and-—above all-—e:>tci3. E 
Ore ays “Death orally comics, but aot ight away”. Wih this 
‘bui.. 2, the “they denies ihat death is certain, “Now rigt t away’ is not 
a pay negative ea Sa way in hin the “they” interprets 
itses. ith this interpreisttor, the “iney” nn tatit to that which is 
proxigally Be ee E ee sey ay. 
DES, prees MS way into the win. of code rn, oot diverts itself of the 


OA Sate EEE, ee z: ES : ae ES SUR: u 
ieit. 3 Gt a weary “inactive Jauklag about cava’, each is deferisd to 
4 3 = | Re ee eee Jaa a e ee a 
Solb u LOE IEI i pice t: A 15 vty Sele Ls wate: eee be ive & „an Bek oe, pal 
cc. ay Sp Pee ee Mn a he ‘es 
ae ar’ “u ae Pe. ne LE ey: Ki te ee OR {.% a aie r> a COVETS up WwW zt: 
. a ee qs eee ee tue 
3 . 2.: ‘ Wir EI eae 
m. Fe den ı ` ; k =~. ar te ©; js? a er =a ‚Al ft 
r- EE ae 3 ir Ta ta: ne “35; Sys Sun be eb TE er; en -o F Th rT- te t= ae H 
whe. arenes) arn ac ea = BS De tis et [2 Anitan E a Bye cyday Being- 
a > — BEL TERRSE SAHNE 
sat, Bd BT Ari CV: cht, re ho aw be » i Br aan ne EEE ah eee akt f eae 
< one See u. } > o R a: 
E ni Beit nT A ey ire ~ BOT pe uk scat ok eee a A DA 3 . a 
er el ei a namen Yer. anne a 
REN Gee RS 7 ‘ © ay iw A 
id Pome ee A ‘ . Pa 
Ae ak Ga wl a‘ + RE | ook ae > ayer DEREN 
or en i : pare! = 
none ECT - r t - = dec N h 7 Ss Art 
Be Bere te pee EI ee aa 
‘ ” BE 2 St t » a 
oO WP Ee. GER Oa w. a Se TE, 272 Kun” = ‚the RES Oe uly n 3 hi a 
s = cah = m aan SS ae a 
Pare ; 5 ‘ : fig es a EEE ar Daren. ~ on Brera =o Oe jo water 
ele ae š i BUTTER -i =" Gx 
a4 EN - = i .. . a <4 a 4 . oe - À Nik an ae Wr J Sun ; é 
MEn Se per: o er EL MERIN olnd EY Tuae RED Die oppii - 


= a to say, possibie Bi any momen: 
w that we have completed our Interpretation of che everyday 
manner in which the “they” talks about death and the way death enters 


II. ı Being and Time 303 


into Dasein, we have been led to the characters of certainty and indefinite- 
ness. The full existential-ontological conception of death may now be 
defined as follows: death, as the end of Dasein, is Dasein’s ownmost posstbility— 
non-relational, certain and as such indefinite, not to be outstripped. Death is, as 
Dasein’s end, in the Being of this entity towards its end. | 

Defining the existential structure of Being-towards-the-end helps us to 
work out a kind of Being of Dasein in which Dasein, as Dasein, can be a 
whole. The fact that even everyday Dasein already ts towards its end—-that 
is to say, is constantly coming to grips with its death, though in a ‘fugitive’ 
manner—shows that this eng, conclusive [abschliessende] and determina- 
tive for Being-a-whole, is not something to which Dasein ultimately comes 
only in its demise. In Dasein, as being towards its death, its own utter- 
most “not-yet” has alredfly been included—that ‘‘not-yet” which all 
others he ahead of.! So if one has given an ontologically inappropriate 
"nterpretation of Dasein’s “not-yet” as something still outstanding, any 
forma! inference from this tc Dasein’s lack of totality will not be correct. 
The phenomenon of the “not-yei” has been taken over from. thé ““chead-of-itself” ; 
no more thon the care-structure in general, can it serve as a kigher court which would 
rule against the possibility of an existent Being-a-whoie; indeed this “ahead-of- 
steif” is what first of all makes suck a Being-towards-the-end possible. The 
:-chlem of the possible Being-a-whole of that entity which each of us is, 
is a correct one if care, as Dasein’s basic state, is ‘connected’ with death 
-~ihe uttermost possibility for that entity. 

Meanwhile, it remains questionable whether this problem has been as 
yet adequatcly worked out. Being-towards-death is grounded in care. 
Dasein, as thrown Being-in-the-world, bas in svery case already been 
icuivered over to its death. In being towards: its death, Dasein is dying 
factically aad indeed constantly, as long as it has not yet come to its demies. 
When we say that Dasein is factically dying, we aie saying at the same thas 

Wat oa it; Being-t Watt coat Dasem 455 always decides sch lu oan 


: 2 
“N ‘aone © a te. a son f: ie 
Pia aes ` z . aot . DEN ^ f: 
qa Noha 212 * ie Oe > = hie 7 rA t 
“ s De ... 
. g e is š 4 
X yr f 
» 


ET ap) 


A RB ae ki nd dat Hein. ene ha ey it detere: wg jiz 


Potty G a anderen vorgetagert + 1. A ee? Ra a ambiguus, eta tin 
man ond u. our teansltion, thy ugh. the pe aA. casey Vie ultimam nee. 
ry Int wi, alt oilers ‘le she ar! CAE A re ee ee T 
ot noise Es be akrad of win this sense. Re they ean be Aland ÎI ti wie wies 
ai. hey migit be actualired before the uhierate Sant yer! In. heer: actualized eee 


Vs PASSAT eh H 402, where the same visti de Wi tgelageit Gs apparınt!!v spic. 
ie Sara sense io death iself.) 


259 


260 


304 Being and Time II. ı 
own character as the „kind of entity it is, and it does so in every case in 
terms of a possibility which it itself is and which it understands.! 


‘Can Dasein also understand authentically its ownmost possibility, which is 
non-relational and not to be outstripped, which is certain and, as such, 


- indefinite? That is, can Dasein maintain itself in an authentic Being- 


towards-its-end? As long as this authentic Being-towards-death has not 


. been set forth and ontologically defined, there is something essentially 


lacking in our existential Interpretation of Being-towards-the-end. 
Authentic_Being-towards-death si istentiell ell possibility of 
Dasein. This ontical potentiality-for-B must, in turn, be ontologically 
possible. What are the existential cog of this possibility ? How are 
= 


they themselves to become accessible? 


1 53. Existential Projection of an Authentic Being-towards-death 
Factically, Dasein. maintains itself proximally and for the most part in 


an inauthentic Being- ds-death. How is the : ontological possibility of 
an a re ‚characterized “Objectivel ly’, if, in 
the end, Dasein-never vomports itself authentically towards its end, or if, 
in accordance. with its very-meaning, this authentic Being must remain 
hidden from: the Others? Is it not a fanciful undertaking, to project the 
existential possibility of so questionable an existentiell potentiality-for- 
Being? What is needed, if such a projection is to go beyond a merely 
fictitious arbitrary construction? Does Dasein itself give us any instruc- 
tions for carrying it out? And can any grounds for its phenomenal 
legitimacy be taken from Dasein itself? Can our analysis of Dasein up to 
this point give us any preäcriptions for the ontological task we have now 


set ourselves, so that what we have before us may be kept on a road of. 


which we can be sure? 

The existential conception of death has been established ; and therewith 
we have also established what it is that an authentic Being-towards-the- 
end should be able to comport itself towards. We have also characterized 
inauthentic Being-towards-death, and thus we have prescribed in a 
negative way [prohibitiv] how it is possible for authentic Being“towards- 
death not to be. It is with these positive and prohibitive instructions that 
the existential edifice of an authentic Being-towards-death must kr itself 
be projected. 

Dasein is constituted by disclosedness—that is, by an understanding 
with a state-of mind. Authentic Being-towards-death can not evade its own- 


most non-r:lational possibility, or cover up this possibility by thus fleeing 


1 ‘Weil das Dasein existiert, bestimmt es sich als Seiendes, wie es i, je aus einer 


Möglichkeit, die es selbst ist und versteht.’ 


Il. 1 Being and Time 305 
from it, or en a new explanation for it to accord with the common sense of 
the “they”. In our existential projection of an authentic Being-towards- 
Talk, the therefore, we must set forth those items in such a Being which are 

constitutive for it as an understanding of death—and as such an under- 
standing in the sense of Being towards this possibility without either 
fleeing it or covering it up. 

In the first instance, we must characterize Being-towards-death as a 
Being towards a possibility—indeed, towards a distinctive possibility of 
Dasein itself. ‘‘Being towards” a possibility—that is to say, towards some- 
thing possible—may signify “Being out for” something possible, as in 
concerning ourselves with its actualization. Such possibilities are con- 
stantly encountered in the field of what is ready-to-hand and present-at- 
hand—what is attainable, controllable, practicable, and the like. In 
concernfully Being out for something possible, there is a tendency to 
annihilate the possibility of the possible by making it available to us. But the 
concernful actualization of equipment which is ready-to-hand (as in 
producing it, getting it ready, readjusting it, and so on) is always merely 
relative, since even that which has been actualized is still characterized 
in terms of some involvements—indeed this is precisely what characterizes 
its Being. Even though actualized, it remains, as actual, something pos- 
sible for doing something; it is characterized by an “i in-order-to”. What 
our analysis is to make plain is simply how Being out for something con- 
cernfully, comports itself towards the possible: it does so not by the 
theoretico-thematical consideration of the possible as possible, and by 
having regard for its possibility as such, but rather by looking circum- 
spectively away from the possible and looking at that for which it is possible 
[das Wofür-möglich]. 

Manifestly Being-towards-death, which is now in question, cannot have 
the character of concernfully Being out to get itself actualized. For one 
thing, death as possible is not something possible which is ready-to-hand 
or present-at-hand, but a possibility of Dasein’s Being. So to concern 
oneself with actualizing what is thus possible would have to signify, 
“bringing about one’s demise”. But if this were done, Dasein would 
deprive itself of the very ground for an existing Being-towards-death. 

. Thus, if by “Being towards death” we do not have in view an ‘actuali- 
zing’ of death, neither can we mean “dwelling upon the end in its pos- 
sibility”. This is the way one comports oneself when one ‘thinks about 
death’, pondering over when and how this possibility may perhaps be 
actualized. Of course such brooding over death does not fully take away 
from it its character as a possibility. Indeed, it always gets brooded over as 
something that is coming; but in such brooding we weaken it by calculating 


26: 


262 


306 Being and Time I. ı 


how we are to have it at our disposäl. As something possible, it is to 
show as little as possible of its possibility. On the other hand, if Being- 
towards-death has to disclose understandingly the possibility which we 
have characterized, and if it is to disclose it as a possibility, then in such 
Being-towards-death this possibility must not be weakened: it must be 
understood as a possibility, it must be cultivated as a possibility, and we must. 
put up with it as a possibility, in the way we comport ourselves towards it. 

However, Dasein comports itself towards something possible in its 
possibility by expecting it [im Erwarten]. Anyone who is intent on something 
possible, may encounter it unimpeded and undiminished in its ‘whethe 
it comes or does not, or whether it comes after all’.! But with this pheno- 
menon of expecting, has not our analysis reached the sarac kind of Being 
towards the possible to which we have already called attention in our 
description of ‘Being out for something” concernfully? To expect some- 
thing possible is always to understand it aad to ‘have’ it with regard to 
whether and when and how it will be actually present-at-hand. iuxpecting 
is not just an occasional locking-away from the possible to its possible 
actualizauon, but is essentially a waiting for that actualization [ei Wu in 
auf diese]. Even in expecting, one leaps away from the possible and gets a 
foothold in the actual, It is for iis sages that what is capectrd ts 
expecied. By the very nature of expecting, the possible is drawn hate the 

actual, arising out of the actual and returning fo it.® 
But Being towards this pe as Pa towards deat, = 3017: 


JOm port oursely es 


nn ER 


aan” this an ity. But i in this way of a 


Ne 

Joes there not iurk a coming-close to si possivle, and when one is close 
to che possible, does not its actualizuiion emerge? In this kind of coming 
gluse, however, one Goes nor tend towards oe making EE 
gamething actual; but as one comes classer cndersiuncdine’y, ihe pow 
sn oL ae esl at Hear Sa en ae Te r rs ohiei gv 
GAP ROSE ta re bane eo aN er ee ae a a 


‘Für cin ren aufes vor ise a logisches in semem “ob oder ohir odes 
schlesshch doek” uageliipder: ae wiyeinuwiert zu bececuan,’ 
“Auch ae Rawietea hegi cin Auspraiges ro Mégleben und Klassen fea Wink 
uchan, dafür das Erwartete erwasier ist vom Wirziichen aus und auf es m wird das 


Mogicte in das Wirkliche erwartungsmäsıg ho -é.ngezogen.’ 


TL. Korkeufe:: 2 die Al gliene? While we hove user “anticipate” to translate 'vor- 
oes 2’, which rom rather selden, we ab cise use r-less I se translate 


len, which appears very offer in ine foilovang pages, and which has ihe specia: 
connotation Uf ‘ruizmg ahvad', But as Heidegger's remarks have indices p wae band of 
Rute cipation’ which is involved i in Being-tewarrls dea:h, dees not consist in ‘waiting for’ 
death or ‘dwelling upon it’ or ‘actualizing’ it before it normally aa nor dors 
Tunning ahead into it’ in this sense mean that we ‘rush headlong inte iv’ 


il. ı Being and Time 307 
actual. The more unveiledly this possibility gets understood, the more 
purely does the understanding penetrate into it as the possibility of the 
impossibility oj any existence at all. Deäth, as possibility, gives Dasein nothing 
to be ‘actualized’, nothing which Dasein, as actual, could itself de. It is 
the possibility of the impossibility of every way of comporting oneself 
towards anything, of every way of existing. In the anticipation of this 
possibility it becomes ‘greater and greater’; that is to say, the possibility 
reveals itself to be such that it knows no measure at all, no more or less, 
put signifies the possibility of the measureless impossibility of existence. 
In accordance with its essence, this possibility offers no support for 
becoming intent on something, ‘picturing’ to oneself the actuality which 


is possible, and so forgetting its possibility. Being-towards-death, as anti- 
cipation of ae tity, is what first makes th this 3 possibility posstble, and sets 


\ regards its uttermost * essibil ty. Bes to pr pnject self on its ownmest 
Potent jality-for Being means to he “bis to caderstand itself in the Being 
laf rof the: entity so sevealcd---naraely. to exist. An ficipation turns out ta be chs 
the possibility of understanding one’s cunmesi fatal uttermost potentiality= 
5 for -Reing-— thats to say, the possibility oT authen‘tc existewe, The ontological 


ee 


constitution of . uch existenee RET De mare vibe DP setting forth the 
concreis structure of anticipation cf death. How are we to delimit this 
siructure ee meh ? Manifestiy, we must do so by determuring those 
characteristics which must belong te an anti Dep y disciosure so that 2 
san become the pure understanding of thoi cwnmost possibility which is 


norereladenal and not to be outstripsed—- ich is gertun and, as u 
Iadehinite. fi must be noted that understanding dees not primarily mes 
uci ganine atc qwening, but rather underst<oding oneself in that poten- 
Ung URS a eas itaclf ns props ipin ti l 
Death ir mama sernmest possibility. Being kosards tits posts lv dise 
“hoses to Dasein its overmot potentiality- for Be. „„nwhsch Ha vev Being is 


s 4+ So, : = s i $ 9° a 
tae jeste, Ticre it can became manifest to Pastin Lust in this distinctive 
eee” eS pis es eh, ' ee 2 
nn 4D! ay of us own self it has been wreurhidt away Tom th ack 


© 4 M a 
ne un Jereande troithe ise on 


r om 5) ie T, A,n pan Be ‘2 Va 2 u q ù me y 
shicn Pasviu "ean hava dezo, ihis only zevealg its Tactical lostness in the 


everydayness of the they-self. 


1%... dessen Seinsart das Vorlaufen selbst ist.' 2i.c carlier ediuons have ‘hat’ instead 
of ‘ist’. 


264 


308 Being and Time II. 1 


The ownmost possibility is non-relational. Anticipation allows Dasein to 
understand that that potentiality-for-being in which its ownmost Being is 
an issue, must be taken over by Dasein alone. Death does not just ‘belong’ 
to one’s own Dasein in an undifferentiated way; death lays claim to it as 
an individual Dasein. The non-relational character of death, as understood 
in anticipation, individualizes Dasein down to itself. This individualizing 
is a way in which the ‘there’ is disclosed for existence. It makes manifest 
that all Being-alongside the things with which we concern ourselves, and 
all Being-with Others, will fail us when our ownmost potentiality-for- 
Being is the issue. Dasein can be authentically itself only if it makes this 
possible for itself of its own accord. But if concern and solicitude fail us, 
this does not signify at all that these ways of Dasein have been cut off 
from its authentically Being-its-Self. As structures essential to Dasein’s 
constitution, these have a share in conditioning the possibility of any 
existence whatsoever. Dasein is authentically itself only to the extent that, 
as concernful Being-alongside and solicitous Being-with, it projects itself 
upon its ownmost potentiality-for-Being rather than upon the possibility 
of the they-self. The entity which anticipates its non-relational possibility, 
is thus forced by that very very anticipation into the possibility of tak taking c over 
from itself its ownmost Being, and doing so of its own accord. — u 

The ownmost, non-relational possibility is not to be outstripped. Being 
towards this possibility enables Dasein to understand that giving itself up 
impends for it as the uttermost possibility of its existence. ee 


for acc eeping tis, When, by anticipation, one | Sa, ape becomes fe . for one’s own 
death, one is liberated fro rom one’s lostness in those possibilities which may 
accidentally thrust themselves upon one; and one is liberated in such a 
way that for the first time one can authentically understand and choose 
among the factical possibilities lying ahead of that possibility which is 
not to be outstripped.! Anticipation discloses to existence that its utter- 
most possibility lies in giving itself up, and thus it shatters all one’s t teng- 
ciousness to whatever _existence_one has reached. In anticipation, Dasein 
guards itself against falling back behind itself, or behind the potentiality- 
for-Being which it has understood. It guards ds itself If against ‘becoming too 
old for its victories’ (Nietzsche): Free for its ownmost possibilities; which 
are determined by the end and so are understood as iche], Dasein 
dispels the danger t that it may, by its own eee een eet 
fail to recognize that it is getting outstripped by the existence-possibilities 
of Others, or rather that it may explain these possibilities wrongly and 
Soe die der uniiberholbaren vorgelagert sind.’ Sce note 1, p. 303, H. 259 above. 


IL. 1 Being and Time 309 


force them back upon its own, so that it may divest itself of its ownmost 
factical existence. As the non-relational possibility, death individualizes 
—but only in such a manner that, as the possibility which is not tobe out- 
stripped, it makes Dasein, as Being-with, have some understanding of the 
potentiality-for-Being of Others. Since anticipation of the possibility which 


nn ee a, 


— nee 


BA um 
"æ 


is certain. The way to be certain of it is determined by the kind of truth 
which corresponds to it (disclosedness). The certain possibility of death, 
however, discloses Dasein as a possibility, but does so only in such a way 
that, in anticipating this possibility, Dasein makes this possibility possible for 
itself as its ownmost potentiality-for-Being.! The possibility is disclosed 
because it is made possible in anticipation. To maintain oneself in this 
truth—that is, to be certain of what has been disclosed—demands all 
the more that one should anticipate. We cannot compute the certainty of 
death by ascertaining how many cases of death we encounter. This 
certainty is by no means of the kind which maintains itself in the truth of 
the present-at-hand. When something present-at-hand has been un- 
covered, it is encountered most purely if we just look at the entity and let 
it be encountered in itself. Dasein must first have lost itself in the factual 
circumstances [Sachverhalte] (this can be one of care’s own tasks and 
possibilities) if it is to obtain the pure objectivity—that is to say, the 
indifference—of apodictic evidence. If Being-certain in relation to death 
does not have this character, this does not mean that it is of a lower grade, 
but that it does not belong at all to the graded order of the kinds of evidence we can 
have about the present-at-hand. 

Holding death for true (death zs just one’s own) shows another kind of 
certainty, and is more primordial than any certainty which relates to 
entities encountered within-the-world, or to formal objects; for it is 
certain of Being-in-the-world. As such, holding death for true does not 
demand just one definite kind of behaviour in Dasein, but demands Dasein 

1 ‘Die gewisse Möglichkeit des Todes erschliesst das Dasein aber als Möglichkeit nur 
so, dass es vorlaufend zu ihr diese Möglichkeit als eigenstes Seinkönnen für sich ermög- 
licht” While we have taken ‘Die gewisse Möglichkeit des Todes’ as the subject of this 
puzzling sentence, ‘das Dasein’ may be the subject instead. The use of the preposition ‘zu’ 
instead of the usual ‘in’ after ‘vorlaufend’ suggests that in ‘anticipating’ the possibility of 
death, Dasein is here thought of as ‘running ahead’ towards it or up to it rather than into it. 


When this construction occurs in later passages, we shail indicate it by subjoining ‘zu’ 
in brackets. 


265 


265 


310 Being and Time IL 
itself in ae full oe. of its nn xvili In ngocparion D Dasein 


nr ee 


which isnot to be immediate ENR of SEAR of the “ep, or of 
consciousness, must necessarily lag bchind the certainty which anticipa- 
tion includes. Yet this is not because the way in which these are grasped 
would not be a rigorous one, but because in principle such a way of- 
grasping them cannot hold for true (disclosed) something which at bottom 
it insists upon ‘having there’ as true: namely, Dasein itself, which I 
myself am, and which,-as a _potentiality-for-Being, I can be authentically 
only by aı anticipation. 

The ownmöst possibiäity, which is non-relational, not to bg outstripped, 
and certain, is indefinite as regards its certainty. How does anticipation 
disclose this characteristic of Dasein’s distinctive possibility ? How does the 
anticipatory understanding project itself upon a potentiality-for-Being 
which is certain and which is constantly possible in such a way that the 
“when” in which the utter impossibility of existence becomes possible 
remains constantly indefinite? In anticipating [zum] the indefinite 


certainty of death, Dasein opens it itself to a constant threat arising í out of its 

46 ZZ OST Dae EA . 
wt an In this ve threat Being-towards-the-end must maintain 
itself So little can it tone this down that it must rather cultivate the 
inaefiniteness of the certainty. How is it existentially possible for this 
constant threat to be genuinely disclosed? All understanding is accom- 


panied by a state-of-mind. Dasein’s mood brings it face to face with the 
thrownness of its ‘that it is there’. But the state-of-mind_ mind which can hold 


open Big omni to itself arising ing from ‚ Dasein’s own ownmost st individual- 
ized Bei is anxiely. n this state-0 f-mind, Dasein finds its finds itself f face to Face 


bestimmten Seienden], and in way it dis scloses ‘the uttermost pos- 
sibility. uticipation utterly individualizes Dasein, and allows it, in this 
riividualization of itself, to become certain of the ‘totality c of its potenti- 
ality-for-Being. ing. For this-re Teason, , anxiety asa ba: basic ‚state-of-mind belongs 
{such a self-understanding of Dasein on the basis of Dasein itself.? 


Teo am o 


5s- — F 


ing-towards-d is essentially anxiety., This is is attested unmistakably, 
though ‘only’ indirectly, by Being-towards-death as we have described it, 


1 ‘Die Befindlichkett aber, welche die ständige und schlechthinnige, aus dem eigensten vereinzelten 
Sein des Dasiens cufsteigende Bedrohung seiner selbst offen zu halten vermag, ist die Angst.’ Notice 
sah ‘welche’ may be construed either as the subject or as the direct object of the relative 
clause. 

3*4, . . gehört zu diesem Sichverstehen des Daseins aus seinem Grunde die Grund-. 
befindlichkeit der Angst.’ It is not grammatically clear whether ‘seinem’ refers to ‘Sich- 
verstehen’ or to ‘Daseins’, 


IT. 1 Being and Time gıı 
when it perverts anxiety into cowardly fear and, in surmounting this fear, 
oriy makes known its own cowardliness in the face of anxiety. 

We may now summarize our characterization of authentic Being- 
‚ward eath as we have projected it existentially: anticipation reveals to 


“zwin iss dostness in the they-self, and brings it face to face with the possibility of 


beig itself, primarily unsupported by concernful solicitude, but of being itself, rather, 
it amım asstoned fre death—a freedom which has been released 
and which is factical, certain of itself, and anxious. 
. Ail the relationships which belong to Being-towards-death, up to the 
full content of Dasein’s uttermost possibility, as we have characterized it, 
senstitute an anticipation which they combine in revealing, ade 
ard holding fast, as that which makes this possibility possible. The existen- 


tiai projection in which anticipation has been delimited, has made visible 
the ontological possibility of an existentiell Being-towards-death which is 
authentic. Therewith, however, the posibility of Dasein’s having an 
“Guihentic tentiality-for-Being-a-whole emerges, but only as an ontological 
oda In our existential projection of anticipation, we have of course 
clung to those structures of Dasein which we have arrived at earlier, and 
we have, as it were, let Dasein itself project itself upon this possibility, 
without holding up to Dasein an ideal of existence with any special ‘con- 
tent’, or forcing any such ideal upon it ‘from outside’. Nevertheless, this 
existentially ‘possible’ Being-towards-death remains, from the existentiell 


point of view, a fantastical exaction. The fact that an authentic} Por 
for-Being-a-whole is ontologically possible for Dasein, signifies no nothing, 


Yong as a corresponding ontical potentialit -for-Being has not t been ‘denon, 
rated in Dasein Till Dos Dasein ever Italy throw fc itself into such 
a Being-towards-death es Dasein demand, even by reason of its own- 
most Being, an authentic potentiality-for-Being determined by anticipation? 

Before answering these questions, we must investigate whether to any 
extent and in any way Dasein gives testimony, from its ownmost potentiality- 
for-Being, as to a possible authenticity of its existence, so that it not only 
makes known that in an existentiell manner such authenticity is possible, 
tut demands this of itself. 

The question of Dasein’s authentic Being-a-whole and of its existential 
constitution still hangs in mid-air. It can be put on a phenomenal basis 


which stand the test only if it can cling tc a possı icity of 
i hich is attested by Dasein itself. If we succeed in uncovering 


that attestation phenomenologically, together with what it attests, then 
the problem will arise anew as 10 whether the antici cipation of [zum] death, 
which we have hitherto projected only in its ontological possibility, has ai an essential 
connettion with that authentic potentiality-for-Being w which has been attested, 


267 


IT 


DASEIN’S ATTESTATION OF AN AUTHENTIC 
POTENTIALITY-FOR-BEING, AND RESOLUTENESS 


T 54. The Problem of How an Authentic Existentiell Posstbility is Attested, 


WHAT we are seeking is an authentic potentiality-for-Being of Dasein, / 
which will be attested in its existentiell possibility by Dasein itself. But 
this very attestation must first be such that we can find it. If in this 
attestation, Dasein itself, as something for which authentic existence is 
possible, is to be ‘given’ to Dasein ‘to understand’,? this attestation will 
have its roots in Dasein’s Being. So in exhibiting it phenomenologically, 
we include a demonstration that in Dasein’s state of Being it has its source. 
In this attestation an authentic potentiality-for-Being-one’s-Self is to be 
given us to understand. The question of the “wko” of Dasein has been 
answered with the expression ‘Self’.! Dasein’s Selfhood has been defined 
formally as a way of existing, and therefore not as an entity present-at-hand. 
For the most part J myself am not the “who” of Dasein; the they-self is its 
“who”. Authentic Being-one’s-Self takes the definite form of an exis- 
tentiell modification of the “they”; and this modification must be 
defined existentially.!! What does this modification imply, and what are 
the ontological conditions for its possibility ? 
268 With Dasein’s lostness in the “they”, that factical potentiality-for- 
Being which is closest to it (the tasks, rules, and standards, the urgency and 
extent, of concernful and solicitous Being-in-the-world) has already been 


decided upon. The “they” has always k in from taking hold of 
these possibilities of Being. The “they” even hides the manner in which it 


has tacitly relieved Dasein of the bur explicitly choosing these 
possibilities, ins indefini : : e the choosing. So 


Dasein_maxe no choices, ied along b nob and thus 
ensnares itself in inauthenticity. This process can be reversed only if 
Rasein specifically brings itself back to itself from its lostness in the “they”. 
But {hr ringing back mist have Tiat kind of Being Jy # y the neglect of which _ 

1°... wenn sie dem Dasein es selbst in seiner möglichen eigentlichen Existenz “zu 
verstehen geben” ... .’ 7 


II. 2 Being and Time 313 
Dasein has lost itself in inauthentici ‚When Dasein thus brings itself back 
[Das ichzurückholen] from the “they”, the they-self is modified in an 
existentiell manner so tha ecomes authentic Being-one’s-Self. This must 
be accomplished by making up for not choosing [Nachholen i einer Wahl]. 
But “making tip” Tor not choosing signifies choosing to make this choice— 
deciding for.a potentiality-for-Being, and-making this decision from one’s 
own Self. In choosing to make this choice, Dasein ‘makes possible, first first and 
foremost, its authentic potentiality-for-Being, 

But because Dasein is lost in the “they”, it müst st first find itself. In order 
to find itself at all, it must be ‘shown’ to itself in its its possible authenticity. 
In terms of ei, Dasein is already a potentiality-for-Being-its-Self, 
but it needs to have this potentiality attested. 

In the following Interpretation we shall claim that this potentiality is 
attested by that which, in Dasein’s everyday interpretation of itself, is 
familiar to us as the “voice of conscience” [Stimme des Gewissens]! That the 
very ‘fact’ of conscience has been disputed, that its function as a higher 
court for Dasein’s existence has been variously assessed, and that ‘what 
conscience says’ has been interpreted in manifold ways—all this might 
only mislead us into dismissing this phenomenon if the very ‘doubtfulness’ 
of this Fact—or of the way in which it has been interpreted—did not prove 
that here a primordial phenomenon of Dasein lies before us. In the following 
analysis conscience will be taken as something which we have in advance 


theoretically, and it will be investigated i in a purely existential mannner; . 


with fundamental ontology as our aim. 

We shall first trace conscience back to its existential foundations and 
structures and make it visible as a phenomenon of Dasein, holding fast 
to what we have hitherto arrived at as that entity’s state of Being. The 
ontological analysis of conscience on which we are thus-embarking, is 
prior to any description and classification of Experiences of conscience, 
and likewise lies outside of any biological ‘explanation’ of this phenomenon 
(which would mean its dissolution). But it is no less distant from a theo- 
lozical exegesis of conscience or any employment of this phenomenon for 
proofs of God or for establishing an ‘immediate’ consciousness of God. 

Nevertheless, even when our investigation of conscience is thus re- 
stricted, we must neither exaggerate its outcome nor make perverse claims 
about it and lessen its worth. As a phenomenon of Dasein, conscience is 
not just a fact which occurs and is occasionally present-at-hand. It ‘is 
only in Dasein’s kind of Being, and it makes itself known as a Fact only 
with factical existence and init. The demand that an ‘inductive empirical 
proof’ should be given for the ‘factuality’ of conscience and for the 
legitimacy of its ‘voice’, rests upon an ontological perversion of the 


269 


270 


314 Being and Time Il. 2 


phenomenon. This perversion, however, is one that is shared by every 


, “superior” criticism in which conscience is taken as something just 


occurring from time to time rather than as a ‘universally established and 
ascertainable fact’. Among such proofs and counterproofs, the Fact of 
conscience cannot prescnt itself at all. This is no lack in it, but merely a 
sign. by which we can recognize it as omtclogically of a different kind from 
what is environmentally present-at-hand. 

Conscience gives us ‘somethipg-to understand; it discloses. By 
characterizing this phenomenon formally in this way, we find ourselves 
enjoined to take it back into the disclosedness of Dasein. This disclosedness, 
as a basic state of that entity which we ourselves are, is constituted by 
state-of-mind, understanding, falling, and discourse. If we analyse con- 
science more penetratingly, it is revealed as a call [Ruf]. Calling is a mode 


of GE ar ese cone HU I Se al to Dasein 
by calling it to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self; and this is 


done by way of summoning it to its ownmost Being-guilty.! 

‘This existential Interpretation is necessarily a far cry from everyday 
ontical common sense, though it sets forth the ontological foundations of 
what the ordinary way of interpreting conscience has always understood 
within certain limits and has conceptualized as a ‘theory’ of conscience. 
Accordingly our existential Interpretation needs to be confirmed by a 
critique of the way in which conscience is ordinarily interpreted. When 
this phenomenon has been exhibited, we can bring out the extent to which 
it attests an authentic potentiality-for-Being of Dasein. To the call of 
conscience there corresponds a possible hearing. Qur understandin “of 


. e a Fe . Da e 
the appeal unveils itself as our wanting to-havg a conscience [Gewtssenhaben- 


ot, 


1 ‘Der Gewissensruf hat den Charakter des Anrufs des Daseins auf sein eigenstes Selb- 
stseinkönnen und das in der Weise des Aufrufs zum eigensten Schuldigsein.’ Our transla- 
tion of ‘Anruf’ as ‘appeal’ and of ‘Aufruf’ as ‘summoning’ conceals the etymelogical 
connection of these expressions with ‘Ruf’, which we here translate as ‘call’—a word which 
we have already used in translating expressions such as ‘nennen’, ‘heissen’, and a number 
of others. The verb ‘anrufen’ (‘appeal’) means literally ‘to call to’; ‘einen auf etwas 
anrufen’ means ‘to call to someone and call him to something’. Similarly ‘aufrufen’ 
(‘summon’) means ‘to call up’; ‘einen zu etwas aufrufen’ means ‘to call someone up to 
something which he is to do’, in the sense of challenging him or ‘calling’ him to a higher 
level of performance. 

u . . das gesuchte existenzielle Wählen der Wahl eines Selbstseins, das wir, seiner 
existentialen Struktur entsprechend, die Entschlossenheit nennen.’ While our version 
preserves the grammatical ambiguity of the German, it seems clear from H. 298 that the 


antecedent of the second relative clause is ‘Selbstsein’ (‘a kind of Being-one’s-self”), not 
‘Wählen’ (‘choosing’). 


II. 2 Being and Time 315 


logical foundations of conscience (Section 55); the character of conscience 
as a call (Section 56); conscience as the call of care (Section 57); under- 
standing the appeal, and guilt (Section 58) ; the existential Interpretation 
of conscience and the way conscience is ordinarily interpreted (Section 
59) ; the existential structure of the authentic potentiality-for-Being which 
is attested in the conscience (Section 60). 


155. The Extstential-ontological Foundations of Conscience 

In the phenomenon of conscience we find, without further differentia- 
tion, that in some way it gives us something to understand. Our analysis 
of it takes its departure from this finding. Conscience discloses, and thus 
belongs within the Pea of those existential phenomena which constitute 
the Being of the ““there’’ as disclosedness.'¥ We have analysed the most 
universal structures er state-of-mind, understanding, discourse and falling. 
If we now bring conscience into this phenomenal context, this is not a 


matter of applying these structures schematically to a special ‘case’ of ` 


Dasein’s disclosure. On the contrary, our Interpretation of conscience not 
pay will carry further our earlier analysis of the disclosedness of the 
“there”’,-but_it will also_grasp it more primordially with regard to 
Dasein’s authentic Being. 
“Through disclosedness, that entity- which we call “Dasein” is in the 
possibility of being its “there”. With its world, it is there for itself, and 
indeed—proximally and for the most part—in such a way that it has 
disclosed to itself its potentiality-for-Being in terms of the ‘world’ of its 
concern. Dasein exists as a potentiality-for-Being which has, in each case, 
already abandoned itself to definite possibilities.t And it has abandoned 
itseif to these possibilities because it is an entity which has bee: thrown, 
aud an entity whose thrownness gets disclosed more or less plainly and 
impressively by its having a mood. To any state-of-mind or mood, under- 
standing belongs equiprimordially.}In this way Dasein ‘knows’ what it is 
itself capable of [woran es mit ihm selbst ist], inasmuch as it has either 
projected itself upon possibilities of its own or has been so absorbed in the 
“they” that it has let such possibilities be presented to it by the way in 
which the “they” has publicly interpreted things. The presenting of these 
possibilities, however, is made possible existentially through the fact 
that Dasein, as a Being-with which understands, can listen to Others. 
Losing itself in the publicness and the idle talk of the ‘‘they”’, it fails to hear 
[überhört] |] its own Self in listening to th the e they-self, If Dasein is to be e able 
to get Qroughi back from this lostness of failin ling to hear itself, and if thi if this” 


is to be done through itself, then it must first be able to find itself—to find 


1 ‘Das Seinkönnen, als welches ‘das Dasein existiert, hat sich je "schon bestimmten 
Möglichkeiten überlassen.’ 


271 


316 Being and Time II. 2 


itself 
ip that it listens away to the “they”.! This listening-away must get broken 


thus getting broken off lies in its being appealed to without mediation. 


Dasein fails to hear itself, and listens away to the “they”; and this 
istening-away gets broken by the call if that call, in-accordance with its 
character as such, arouses another kind of hearing, which, i onship 
to the hearing—thar is Jos facter in every way opposite. If in 
this lost hearing, one has been fascinated with the ‘hubbub*of the manifold 
ambiguity which idle talk possesses in its-everyday ‘newness’, then the call 
must do its calling without any hubbub and unambiguously, leaving 


no foothold for curiosity. That which, by calling +n—this-manner,gives us to 
understand, is the consci 
j mode of discourse. Discourse articulateg 


- 


We t 
ee ae conscience as~ is not just giving a 
‘picture’, like the ? 


antıan representation of the cönscience as a court of 
justice. ER and there- 
fore_not for the call either; this must not be overlooked. Discourse is 
already presupposed in any expressing or ‘proclaiming’ [‘‘Ausrufen’’]. 
If the everyday interpretation knows a ‘voice’ of conscience, then one is 
not so much thinking of an utterance (for this is something which facti- 
cally one never comes across); the ‘voice’ is’ taken rather as a giving-to- 
understand. Ir. the tendency to disclosure which belongs to the call, lies 
the momentum of a push--of an abrupt arousal. The call is from afar unto 
afar. kt reaches him who wants to be brought back. 

But by this characterization of the conscience we have only traced the 
phenomenal horizon fer analysing its existential structure. We are not 


1%, ,. sich selbst, das sich üperhört hat und überhört im Hinhören auf das Man.’ In this 
passage, Heidegger has been exploiting three variations on the verb ‘hören’; ‘hören auf...’ 
(our ‘listen to.. .’), “überhören’ (‘fail to hear’), and ‘hinhéren' (‘listen away’). The 
verb ‘iiberhéren’ has two quite distinct uses. It may mean the ‘hearing’ which a teacher 
does when he ‘hears’ a pupil recite his lesson; but it may also mean to ‘fail to hear’, even 
to ‘ignore’ what one hears. This is the meaning which Heidegger seerns to have uppermost 
in mind; but perhaps he is also suggesting that when one is lost in the “‘they’’, one ‘hears’ 
one’s own Self only in the manner of a perfunctory teacher who ‘hears’ a recitation with- 
out ‘really listening to it’. In ordinary German the verb ‘hinhéren’ means hardly more 
than to ‘listen’; but Heidegger is emphasizing the prefix ‘hin-’, which suggests that one is 
listening to something other than oneself—listening away, in this case listening to the 
“they”. On other verbs of hearing and listening, see Section 34 above, especially H. 163 fl. 


2 ‘Dieses Hinhören muss gebrochen, das heisst es muss vom Dasein selbst die Möglich- 
keit eines Hörens gegeben werden, das jenes unterbricht.’ 


8‘... zum verlorenen Hören .. .’ One might suspect that the ‘lost hearing’ is the hearing 
which one ‘loses’ by ‘failing to hear’; but Heidegger may mean rather the kind of hearing 
one does when one is lost in the ‘‘they’—‘Uberhoren’ of one’s own Self-and ‘Hinhoren’ to 
the ‘they’. 


II, 2 Being and Time 317 


comparing this phenomenon with a call; we are understanding it 
as a kind of discourse—in terms of the disclosedness that is constitutive 
for Dasein. In considering this we have from the beginning avoided 
the first route which offers itself for an Interpretation of conscience 
—that of tracing it back to some psychical faculty such as under- 
standing, will, or feeling, or of explaining it as some sort of mixture of 
these. When one is confronted with such a phenomenon as conscience, 
one is struck by the ontologico-anthropological inadequacy of a free-floating 
framework of psychical faculties or personal actions all duly classified.¥! 


T 56. The Character of Conscience as a Call 


To any discourse there belongs that which is talked about in it. Dis- 
course gives information about something, and does so in some definite 
regard, From what is thus talked about, it draws whatever it is saying as 
this particular discourse—what is said in the talk as such. In discourse as 
communication, this becomes accessible to the Dasein-with of Others, 
for the most part by way of uttering it in language. 

In the call of conscience, what is it that is talked about—in other words, 
to what is the made? Manifestly Dasein itself. This answer is as 
incontestable as itis inde 
might at most remain an occasion for Dasein to pay attention to itself. 
But it is essential to Dasein that along with the disclosedness of its world 
it has been disclosed to itself, so that it always understands itself. The call 
reaches Dasein in this understanding of itself which it always has, and 
which is concernful in an everyday, average manner. The call reaches 
the they-self of concernful Being with Others. : 

And to what is one called when_o us ealed _to 2 one’s 
own Self. Not to what Dasein counts-for, can do, or concerns itself with in 
being With one another publicly, nor to what it has taken hold of, set 
about, or let itself be carried along with. The sort of Dasein which is 
understood after the manner of the world both for Others and for itself, 
gets passed over in this appeal; this is something of which the call to the 
Self takes not the slightest cognizance. And because only the Self of the 
they-self gets appealed to and brought to hear, the “they” collapses. But 
the fact that the call passes over both the “they” and the manner in which 
Dasein has been publicly interpreted, does not by any means signify that 
the “they” is not reached too. Precisely in passing over the “they” (keen as it 
is for public repute) the call pushes it into insignificance [Bedeutungs- 
losigkeit]. But the Self, which the appeal has robbed of this lodgement 
and hiding-place, gets brought to itself by the call. 


1 ‘Und woraufhin wird es angerufen ?’ 


272 


273 


9 


274 


318 Being and Time II. 2 


When the they-self is appealed to, it gets called to the Self.! But it does 
not get called to that Self which can become for itself an ‘object’ on which 
to pass judgment, nor to that Self which inertly dissects its ‘inner life’ 
with fussy curiosity, nor to that Self which one has in mind when one 
gazes ‘analytically’ at psychical conditions and what lies behind them. 
The appeal to the Self in the they-self does not force it inwards upomitself, 
so that it can close itself off from the ‘external world’. The call passes over 
everything like this and disperses it, so as to appeal solely to that Self 
which, notwithstanding, is in no other way than Being-in-the-world. 

But how are we to determine what ts said in the talk-that belongs to this 


kind o GLISCH € Y¥AALC > CO ence Ca a him to whom: RODE H 


Taken strictly, nothing. The call asserts nothing, gives no i 
abou > ts nothing to east of all does it try to set going 
a ‘soliloquy’ in the Self to which it has appealed. ‘Nothing’ gets called to 


[zu-gerufen] this Self, but it has been summaned [aufgerufen] to itself—that 
ig, to its ost potentiality-for-Being. The tendency of the call is not 
ech aa (6 pul up Re "Ga he Seh Which the appeal is made; but it 
calls in forth (and ‘forward’) into-its ownmost possibilities, as a 


| ttality-for-Being-its-Self,? 
The call dispenses with any kind of utterance. It does not put itself 
into wo t all; yet it remains nothing less than obscure and indefinite. 


nscience discourses solely and constantly tn_the mode of keeping silent. In this 
ait not ly loses done fie perceptibliey, but Taxées the Dastin w ich 
as been appealed to and summoned, into the reticence of itself. The fact 
that what is called in the call has not been formulated in words, does not 
give this phenomenon the indefiniteness of a mysterious voice, but merely 
indicates that our understanding of what is ‘called’ is rot to be tied up 
with an expectation of anything like a communication. 
Yet what the call discloses is unequivocal, even though it may undergo 


a different interpretation in the individual Dasein in accordance with its 


own possibilities of understanding. While the t of the call is seem- 
ingly indefinite, the fein tie is « ae oe a a e 
looked. The call does not require us to search gropingly for him to whom 
it appeals, nor does it require any sign by which we can recognize that he 


is or is not the one who is meant. When ‘delusions’ arise in the jence, 
do so not because the call has commi so j as mis- 
called), but only because the call gets keard in such a way that instead of 


1 “Auf das Selbst wird das Man-selbst angerufen.’ 

% ‘Der Ruf stellt, seiner Ruftendenz entsprechend, das angerufene Selbst nicht zu einer 
“Verhandlung”, sondern als Aufruf zum eigensten Selbstseinkönnen ist er ein Vor-(nach- 
“vorne”-)Rufen des Daseins in seine eigensten Möglichkeiten.” The verbs ‘anrufen’, 
‘aufrufen’, and ‘vorrufen’ can all be used in the legal sense of a ‘summons’. 

3 +.. . ein Sichversehen (Sichver-rufen) des Rufes... 


II. 2 Being and Time 319. 
becoming authentically understood, it gets drawn by the they-self into a 
soliloquy in_which causes get pleaded, and it becomes perverted in its 
tendency to disclose. 


One must keep in mind that when we designate the conscience as. a 


: “call”, this call is an appeal to the they-self in its Self; as such an appeal, 
Piz § the Self to its potentiality-for-Being-its-Self, and thus cal 


| Dasein-forth to its poss 


But we shal! not obtain an ontologically adequate Interpretation of th 
conscience until it can be made plain not only who is called by the call but 
also who does the calling, how the one to whom the appeal is made is related 
to the one who calls, and how this ‘relationship’ must be taken ontologic- 
ally as a way in which these are interconnected in their Being. 


T 57. Conscience as the Call of Care 


Conscience summons Dasein’s Self from its lostness in the “they”. The 
Self to which the appeal is made remains indefinite and empty in ‘its 
“what”. When Dasein interprets itself in terms of that with which it 
concerns itself, the call passes over what Dasein, proximally and for the 
most part, understands itself as. And yet the Self has been reached, 
unequivocally and unmistakably. Not only is the. call meant for him to 
whom the appeal is made ‘without regard for persons’, but even the caier 
maintains itself in conspicuous indefiniteness. If the caller is asked abolit 
its name, status, origin, or repute, it not only refuses to answer, but does 
not even leave the slightest possibility of one’s making it into something 
with which one can be familiar when one’s understanding of Dasein has a 
‘worldly’ orier sation. On the other hand, it by no means disguises itself 
in the call. That which calls the call, simply holds itself aloof from any 
way of becoming well-known, and this belongs to its phenomenal char- 
acter. To let itself be drawn into getting considered and talked about, 
goes against its kind of Being.’ The peculiar indefiniteness of the caller 
and the impossibility Lf making more definite what this caller is, are not 
just nothing; they are distinctive for it in a positive way. They make known 
to us that the caller is solely absorbed in summoning us to something, that 
it is heard only as such, and furthermore that it will not let itself be coaxed. 
But if so, is it not quite appropriate to the phenomenon to leave unasked 


‘the question of what the caller is? Yes indeed, when it comes to listening 


to the factical call of conscience in an existentiell way, but not when it 
comes to analysing existentially the facticity of the calling and the exis- 
tentiality of the hearing. N 


1 'Es geht wider die Art seines Seins, sich in ein Betrachten und Bereden ziehen zu 
lassen’ : 


275 


276 


320 Being and Time II. 2 


But is it at all necessary to keep raising explicitly the question of who 
does the calling? Is this not answered for Dasein just as unequivocally as 
the question of to whom the call makes its appeal? Jn conscience Dasein calls 
itself. This understanding of the caller may be more or less awake in the 
factical hearing of the call. Ontologically, however, it is not enough to 
answer that Dasein is at the same time both the caller and the one to whom 
the appeal is made. When Dasein is appealed to, z it not ‘there’ in a 
different way from that in which it does the calling? Shall we sav that its 
ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self functions as the caller? 

Indeed the call is precisely something which we ourselves have neither 
planned nor prepared for nor voluntarily performed, nor have we ever 
done so. ‘It’ calls,! against our expectations and even against our will. 
On the other hand, the call undoubtedly does not come from someone 
else who is with me in the world. The call comes from me and yet from, 
beyon = = a 

These phenomenal findings are not to be explained away. After all, 
they have been taken as a starting-point for explaining the voice of con- 
science as an alien power by which Dasein is dominated. If the inter- 
pretation continues in this direction, one supplies a possessor for the power 
thus posited,? or one takes the power itself as a person who makes himself 
known-—namely God. On the other hand one may try to reject this 
explanation in which the caller is taken as an alien manifestation of such 
a power, and to explain away the conscience ‘biologically’ at the same 
time. Both these explanations pass over the phenomenal findings too 
hastily. Such procedures are facilitated by the unexpressed but ontologic- 
ally dogmatic guiding thesis that what is (in other words, anything so 
factual as the call) must be present-at-hand, and that what does not let 
itself be Objectively demonstrated as present-at-hand, just is not at all. 

But methodologically this is too precipitate. We must instead hold fast 
not only to the phenomenal finding that I receive the call as coming both 
from me and from beyond me, but also to the implication that this 
phenomenon is here delineated ontologically as a phenomenon of Dasein. 
Only the existential constitution of this entity can afford us a clue for 
Interpreting the kind of Being of the ‘it’ which does the calling. 

Does our previous analysis of Dasein’s state of Being show us a way of 
making ontologically intelligible the kind of Being which belongs 1o the 
caller, and, along with it, that which belongs to the calling? The fact that 


‘the call is not something which is explicitly performed by me, but that 


1° “Es” ruft ...? Here the pronoun ‘es’ is used «tite impersonally, and does not 
refer back to ‘the call’ itself (‘Der Ruf’). f 

2 ‘Der Ruf kommt aus mir und doch über mich.’ 

9*. .. unterlegt man der festgelegten Macht einen Besitzer . . .’ 


II. 2 Being and Time 321 


rather ‘it’ does the calling, does not justify seeking the caller in some 


entity with a character other than that of Dasein. Yet every Dasein 
always exists factically. It is not a free-floating self-projection; but its 
character is determined by thrownness as a Fact of the entity which it is; 
and, as so determined, it has in each case atready been delivered over to 
existence, and it constantly so remains. Dasein’s facticity, however, is 
essentially distinct from the factuality ef something present-at-hand. 
Existent Dasein does not encounter itself as something present-at-hanc 
within-the-world. But neither does throwrness adhere to Dascin as an 
inaccessible characteristic which is of no importance for its existence. 
As something thrown, Dasein has been thrown into existence. It exists as 
an entity which has to be as it is and as it can be. 

That it is factically, may be obscure and hidden as regards the ‘‘why” 
of it; but the “that-ıt-ıs’ as itself been disclosed to Dasein.! The thrown- 
ness of this entity belor s to the disclosedness of the ‘there’ and reveals 
itself constantly in its ¢ irrent state-of-mind. This state-of-mind brings 
Dasein, more or less explicitly and authentically, face to face with the 
fact ‘that it is, and that it has to be something with a potentiality-for- 
Being as the entity which it is’.? For the most part, however, its mood is 
rea that its throw nness gets closed off. I, che face of its throw nness a 


ire e mamaman n ae a Ot Oana ene 
um 


Yhich is basically determinative Tor individualized Being-in- in-the-world. 
neanniness reveals itself authentici: y in oe state- of-mind of. 


ith N EEn romanos po potenti: ye Behe, What if this Dasein, 
which finds i itself [sich befindet] in the very depths of its uncanniness, should be the 
caller of the call of conscience? 

Nothing speaks against this; but all those phenomena which we have 
hitherto set forth in characterizing the caller and its calling speak 
for it. 


In its “who”, the caller is definable in a ‘worldly’ way by nothing at all. 
\ ne oy cara eee ieee eS pence thrown Being-in-the- 


world as the ‘“‘not-at-home”’- '—the bare ‘that-it-is’ in the “nothing” of the 
world. The caller is unfamiliar to the eV ‘veryday they-self; it ‘is something 
ae o could be more alien to the they”, lost in the 


1 ‘Dass es faktisch ist, mag hinsichtlich des Warum verborgen sein, das ‘Dass’ selbst 
jedoch ist dem Dasein erschlossen.’ (Cf. H. 135 above.) 

2 ‘Diese bringt das Dasein mehr oder minder ausdrücklich und eigentlich vor sein 
“dass es ist und als das Seiende, das es ist, seinkönnend zu sein hat”.’ 


L 


This geeing has = described as a fleeing ir: abe face nt ie names ch 


~y 


gan Being and Time 11. 3 
manifold ‘world’ of its concern, than the Self which has been individualized 
down to itself in uncanniness and been thrown into the “pothing’’? ‘It’ 
‘Gails, even though it gives the concernfully curious ear ngthing to hear 
"ich nicht be passed along in further retelling and tafked about in 
publi:. :...: what is Dasein even to report from the un iness of its 
throv... eing? What else remains for it than its own pgtentiality-for- 
Beii: as .¢vealed in anxiety? How else is “it” to call than by sunumoning 
Da. -awards this potentiality-for-Being, which alone is the issue? 


. = cr does not report events; it calls wi ing. anything. 
Th: ú. discourses in the uncanny mode of keeping silent. And it docs 


thi. . ae Edle cof the “they bar eallı hin Ts it does 
not cx! um into blic idle talk > 2 ls him back from 
thi. :: ~ ine reticence of his existent potenitiality-for-Being. When the caller 

_ Tes.: uim to whom the appeal is made, it does so with a cold assurance 
wh:is 1 uncanny but by no means obvious. Wherein lies the basis for this 
assi: vance if not in the fact that when Dasein has been individualized 
down | itself in its uncanniness, it is for itself something that simply 
cannot b+ mistaken for anything else? What is it that so radically deprives 
Dasein of the possibility of misunderstanding itself by any sort of alibi 
and failing to recognize itself, if not the forsakenness [Verlassenheit] with 
which it has been abandoned fÜberlassenheit] to itself? 

f Uncanniness is the basic kind of Being-in-the-world, even though in an 
everyday way it has been covered up. Out of the depths of this kind of 
Being, Dasein itself, as conscience, calls, The ‘it calls me” [‘‘es ruft mich’) 
is a distinctive Kind of discourse for Dasein. The call whose mood has been 
attuned by anxiety is what makes it possible first and foremost for Dasein 
to project itself upon its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. The call of con- 
science, existentially understood, makes known for the first time what 


we have hitherto merely contended :¥i! a ee 
and isat e los in which it has forgotten itself. 


P 


un 


The proposition that Dasein is at the same time both the caller and the 
one to whom the appeal is made, has now lost its empty formal character 
and its obviousness. Conscience mantfests itself as the callaf care: the caller is 
Dasein, which, in its thrownness (in its Being-already-in), is anxious! 
about its potentiality-for-Being, The one to whom the appeal is made is 
this very same- oned to its ownmost patentiality-for-Being 


(ahead of itself. . .). Dasein i Gilling into-the “they” (in Being-already- 
alongside the World of its concern), and it is summoned out of this falling 
278 by the appeal. The call of conscience—that is, conscience itself—has its 


1‘... sich ängstigend .. ." The older editions have ‘sich angstend’, which has virtually 
the same meaning, and is more characteristic of Heidegger’s style. 


Il. 2 Being and Time 323 


ontological possibility in the fact that Dasein, in the very basis of its 
Being, is care. € 

So we need not resort to powers with a character other than that of 
Dasein; indeed, recourse to these is so far from clarifying the uncanniness 
of the call that instead it annihilates it. In the end, does not the reason 
why ‘explanations’ of the conscience have gone off the track, lie in the 
fact that we have not looked long enough to establish our phenomenal 
findings as to the call, and that Dasein has been presupposed as having 
some kind of ontological definiteness or indefiniteness, whichever it may 
chance? Why should we look to alien powers for information before we 
have made sure that in starting our analysis we have not given too low an 
assessment of Dasein’s Being, regarding it as an innocuous subject endowed 
with personal consciousness, somehow or other occurring? 

And yet, if the caller—who is ‘nobody’, when seen after the manner of 
the world—is interpreted as a power, this seems to be a dispassionate 
recognition of something that one can ‘come across Objectively’. When 
seen correctly, however, this interpretation is only a fleeing in the face of 
the conscience—a way for Dasein to escape by slinking away from that 
thin wall by which the “they” is separated, as it were, from the uncanni- 
ness of its Being. This interpretation of the conscience passes itself off as 
recognizing the call in the sense of a voice which is ‘universally’ binding, 
and which speaks in a way that is ‘not just subjective’. Furthermore, the 
‘universal’ conscience becomes exalted to a ‘world-conscience’, which 
still has the phenomenal character of an ‘it’ and ‘nobody’, yet 
which speaks—there in the individual ‘subject’—as this indefinite some- 
thing. 

But this ‘publie conscience’—what else is it than the voice of the “they” ? 
A ‘world-conscience’ is a dubious fabrication, and Dasein can come to this 
only because conscience, in its basis and its essence, is in each case mine—not 
only in the sense that m each case the appeal is to one’s ownmost poten- 

tiality-for-Being, but because the call comes from that a which in 
gach case I myself am. 

With this Interpretation of the caller, which is purely: in acco with the 
phenomenal character of the calling, the ‘power’ of conscience is not 


diminished and rendered ‘merely subjective’. On the contrary, only in 


this way do the inexorability and unequivocal character of the call 
become free. This Interpretation does justice to the ‘Objectivity’ of the 
appeal for the first time by leaving it its ‘subjectivity’, which of course 
denies the they-self its dominion. 

Nevertheless, this Interpretation of the conscience as the call of care 
will be countered by the question of whether any interpretation of the 


279 


280 


324 Being and Time II. 2 
conscience can stand up if it removes itself so far from ‘natural experience’. 
How is the conscience to function as that which summons us to our Own- 
most potentiality-for-Being, when proximally and for the most part it 
merely warns and reproves? Does the conscience speak in so indefinite and 
empty a manner about our potentiality-for-Being? Does it not rather 
speak definitely and concretely in relation to failures and omissions which 
have already befallen or which we still have before us? Does the alleged 
appeal stem from a ‘bad’ conscience or from a ‘good’ one? Does the con- 
science give us anything positive at all? Does it not function rather in 
just a critical fashion ? 

Such considerations are indisputably within their rights. We can, 

however, demand that in any Interpretation of conscience ‘one’ should 
recognize in it the phenomenon in question as it is experienced in an 
everyday manner. But satisfying this requirement does not mean in turn 
that the ordinary ontical way of understanding conscience must be recog- 
nized as the first court of appeal [erste Instanz] for an ontological Inter- 
pretation, On the other hand, the considerations which we have just 
marshalled remain premature as long as the analysis of conscience to 
which they pertain falls short of its goal. Hitherto we have merely 
tried to trace back conscience as a phenomenon of Dasein to the onto- 
logical constitution of that entity. This has served to. prepare us 
for the task of making the conscience intelligible as an attestation of 
Dasein’s ownmost potentiality-for-Being—an attestation which lies in Dasein 
itself. 
__ But what the conscience attests becomes completely definite only when 
we have delimited plainly enough the character of the hearing which 
genuinely corresponds to the calling. The authentic understanding which 
‘follows’ the call is not a mere addition which attaches itself to the 
phenomenon of conscience by a process which may or may not be forth- 
coming. Only from an understanding of the appeal and together with 
such an understanding does the full Experience of conscience let itself be 
grasped. If in each case the caller and he to whom the appeal is made 
are at the same time one’s own Dasein themselves, then in any failure to hear 
the call or any incorrect hearing of oneself, there lies a definite kind of Dasein’s 
Being. A free-floating call from which ‘nothing ensues’ is an impossible 
fiction when seen existentially. With regard to Dasein, ‘that nothing 
ensues’ signifies something positive. 

So then, only by analysing the way the appeal is understood can one 
be led to discuss explicitly what the call gives one to understand. But only with 
our foregoing general ontological characterization of the conscience does 
it become possible to conceive existentially the conscience’s call of 


IT. 2 Being and Time 325 


‘Guilty ”? All experiences and interpretations of the conscience are at 


one in that they make the ‘voice’ of conscienee-speak somehow of ‘guilt’. 


T 58. Understanding the Appeal, and Guilt 


To grasp phenomenally what one hears in understanding the appeal, 
we must go back to the appeal anew. The appeal to the they-self signifies 
summoning one’s ownmost Self to its potentiality-for-Being, and of course 
as Dasein—that is, as concernful Being-in-the-world and Being with 
Others. Thus in Interpreting existentially that towards which the call 
summons us, we cannot seek to delimit any concrete single possibility of 
existence as long as we correctly understand the methodological possibili- 
ties and tasks which such an Interpretation implies. That which can be 
established, and which seeks to be established, is not what gets called in 
and to each particular Dasein from an existentiell standpoint, but is 
rather what belongs to the existential condition for the possibility of its factical- 
existentiell potentiality-for-Being.* 

When the call is understood with an existentiell kind of hearing, such 
understanding is more authentic the more non-relationally Dasein hears 
and understands its own Being-appealed-to, and the less the meaning of 
the call gets perverted by what one says or by what is fitting and accepted 
[was sich gehört und gilt]. But what is it that is essentially implied when 
the appeal is understood authentically ? What is it that has been essentially 
given us to understand in the call at any particular time, even if factically 
it has not always been understood ? 

We have already answered this question, however, in our thesis that 
the call ‘says’ nothing which might be talked about, gives no information 
about events. The call points orward to Dasein’s iali ing, 
and it dogs this as a-ea = which comes from uncanniness.” The caller is, 
to be sure, indefinite; but the “whence”? from which ıf calls does not 
remain a matter of indifference for the calling. This ‘‘whence”—the 
uncanniness of thrown individualization—gets called too [mitgerufen] in 
the calling; that is, it too gets disclosed [miterschlossen]. In calling forth 


1<, ,. das im Gewissen gerufene “schuldig” existenzial zu begreifen.’ As Heidegger will 
point out, the words ‘schuldig’, ‘Schuld’ and their derivatives have many different 
meanings, corresponding not only to ‘indebtedness’, as we have seen on H. 242 above, but 
also to ‘guilt’ and ‘responsibility’. In the present chapter we shall translate them by 
‘guilty’ and ‘guilt? whenever possible, even though these expressions will not always be 
entirely appropriate. 

2 ‘Nicht das je existenziell im jeweiligen Dasein in dieses Gerufene kann und will 
fixiert werden, sondern das, was zur existenzialen Bedingung der Möglichkeit des je faktisch- 
existenziellen Seinkönnens gehört.’ In the older editions we find ‘an dieses’ rather than ‘in 
dieses’, and ‘zur’ appears in spaced type. 

i 3 ‘Der Ruf weist das Dasein vor auf sein Seinkönnen und das als Ruf aus der Unheim- 
ichkeit.’ 


281 


326 Being and Time JI. 2 
to something, the ““whence” of the calling is the ‘“‘whither” to which we 
are called back. When the call gives us a potentiality-for-Being to under- 
stand, it does not give us one which is ideal and universal; it discloses it 
as that which has been currently individualized and which belongs to 
that particular Dasein. We have not fully determined the character of the 
call as disclosure until we understand it as one which calls us back in 
calling us forth [als vorrufender Rückruf]. If we take the call this way 
and orient ourselves by it, we must first ask what it gives us to understand. 

But is not the question of what the call says answered more easily and 
surely if we ‘simply’ allude to what we generally hear or fail to hear in 
any experience of conscience: namely, that the call either addresses Dascin 


nr 


as ‘Guilty!’, or, as in the > conscience gives warning, refers 


ee EER ‘ e ? c ’ ° . 
to a possible ‘Guilty!’, or affirms, as a ‘good’ conscience, that one is 


‘conscious of no guilt’ ? Whatever the ways in which conscience is experi- 
eased or interpreted, all our experiences ‘agree’ on this ‘Guilty!’. If only 
it were not defined in such wholly different ways! And even if the meaning 
of this ‘Guilty!’ should let itself be taken in a way upon which everyone 
is agreed, the existential conception of this Being-guilty would still remain 
obscure. Yet if Dasein addresses itself as ‘Guilty!’, whence could it draw 
its idea of guilt except from the Interpretation of its own Being? All the 
same, the question arises anew: who says how we are guilty and what ‘‘guilt”’ 
signifies? On the other hand, the idea of guilt is not one which could be 
thought up arbitrarily and forced upon Dasein. If any understanding of 


. the essence of guilt is possible at all, then this possibility must have been 


sketched out in Dasein beforehand. How are we to find the trail which 
can lead to revealing this phenomenon? All ontological investigations of 
such phenomena as guilt, conscience, and death, must start with what the 
everyday interpretation of Dasein ‘says’ about them. Because Dasein has 
falling as its kind of Being, the way Dasein gets interpreted is for the most 
part inauthentically ‘oriented’ and does not reach the ‘essence’; for to 
Dasein the primordially appropriate ontological way of formulating 
questions remains alien. But whenever we see something wrongly, some 
injunction as to the primordial ‘idea’ of the phenomenon is revealed 
along with it. Where, however, shall we get our criterion for the primordial 
existential meaning of the ‘Guilty!’? From the fact that this ‘Guilty!’ 
turns up as a predicate for the ‘I am’. Is it possible that what is under- 
stood as ‘guilt’ in our inauthentic interpretation lies in Dasein’s Being as 
such, and that it does so in such a way that so far as any Dasein factically 
exists, it is also guilty? 

Thus by invoking the ‘Guilty!’ which everyone agrees that he hears, 
one has not yet answered the question of the existential meaning of what 


11.2 Being and Time 327 
has been called in the call. What has been called must first be concep- 
tualized if we are to understand what the call of ‘Guilty!’ means, and why 
and how it becomes perverted in its signification by the everyday way of 
interpreting it. 

Everyday common sense first takes ‘Being-guilty’ in the sense of ‘owing’, 
of ‘having something due on account’.! One is to give back to the Other 
something to which the latter has a claim. This “Being-guilty’ as ‘having 
debts? (“Schulden kaben] is a way of Being with Others in the field of 
concern, as in providing something or bringing it along. Other modes of 
such concern are: depriving, borrowing, withholding, taking, stealing— 
failing to satisfy, in some way or cther, the claims which Others have 
made as to their possessicns. This kind of Being-guilty is related to 
that with which one can concern oneself. 

"also has the signification of ‘being responsible for’ (“schuld 


a 


the occasion’ for something. Te tnis sense of Lanti onsibility’ for 
en. ‘something. sponsibility” 
something, one can “he pe a of somethi: 2g without zu sn to 


peison can “incur debis ah Se “sor me’. 

These ordinary sigtftcations of "Being-guilty” as ‘having debts to 
scneone und "having responsibitiy for something’ can go together and 
define a kind of behavicur wrich we call Unukinp oneself responsible’ ; that 1s, 
by having ine respousibis wey foo having z debt, cne may break a law and 

make oneself puuisnabie n the reaanrement which one fails to satisfy 
need not necessur.iy pe Teac to anyone’s possessions; it can reguiate 
the very mannm i whici: we are with one other publiciy. ‘Making oneself 
responsibie’ by breaking a iaw, as we have thus defined it, can indeed aiso 
have the character of ‘cemiutag to owe something io Uthers’.* This does rot 
happen merely through law-breaking as such, but rather through tsy 
having the responsibility for the Other’s becoming endangered in Ai 
existence, led astray, or even ruined, This wey of coming to owe some sig 

t Die ne. Versrändiekett nimmt das “Schuidissein” zunächst im Siene vor 
““schwiden”, "La can era Twa an Breit i Zn ae yule tiis represents a very ey are 
wage Ol 7 Den. Schuhe; nei, I oi course ices mei scpresent a “common sen. vn 
ef the Forish heina Pen which comes irom ar enur? iv different stem. 

T ‘in: Sines aises "Schuld habens”? an vovas ann mau “schuldig sein”, Dim im 


aan. I. 6s ~ we 7”. “rp Be gia Bago TER ns Ata 
neen war an scawiden” ader “seliuvuie” zu cords. Tomwekelet kann can 
rn x Fe P per D N as * a J 3 Pie by 
Goudesn etwas seleil ca, umie seibst sshd daran so cain, Bin Anderer kann ii 
on : OF SPRY Ale laa A aphar 2? p bobs = mes (eee - u): 
“Fir ruch” “ha ditesw mache, Cn sifted „a verion’, GE our noie 


= i below. 
. das wir nennen “sich schuldig machen”, das cetsst durch das Schuldhat. 
Tchunsenhabe: wa Recht verletzen und o ucether machen,’ 
4°... eines "Schwldigwerdens un Anderen”. 


282 


283 


328 Being and Time II. 2 


to Others is possible without breaking the ‘public’ law. Thus the formal 
conception of“ Being-guilty” in the sense of having come to owe something 
to an Other, may be defined as follows: “‘Being-the-basts for a lack of some- 
thing in the Dasein of an Other, and in such a manner that this very 
Being-the-basis determines itself as ‘lacking in some way’ in terms of that 
for which it is the basis.” ! This kind of lacking is a failure to satisfy some 
requirement which applies to one’s existent Being with Others. 

We need not consider how such requirements arise and in what way 
their character as requirements and laws must be conceived by reason of 
their having such a source. In any case, ‘‘Being-guilty”’ in the sense last 
mentioned, the breach of a ‘moral requirement’, is a kind of Being which 
belongs to Dasein. Of course this holds good also for “Being-guilty” as 
‘making oneself punishable’ and as ‘having debts’, and for any ‘having 
responsibility for . . .’, These too are ways in which Dasein behaves. If 
one takes ‘laden with moral guilt’ as a ‘quality’ of Dasein, one has said 
very little. On the contrary, this only makes it manifest that such a char- 
acterization does not suffice for distinguishing ontologically between this 
kind of ‘attribute of Being’ for Dasein and those other ways of behaving 
which we have just listed. After all, the concept of moral guilt has been so 
little clarified ontologically that when the idea of deserving punishment, 
or even of having debts to someone, has also been included in this concept, 
or when these ideas have been employed in the very defining of it, such 
interpretations of this phenomenon could become prevalent and have 
remained so. But therewith the ‘Guilty!’ gets thrust aside into the domain 
of concern in the sense of reckoning up claims and balancing them off. 

The phenomenon of guilt, which is not necessarily related to ‘having 
debts’ and law-breaking, can be clarified only if we first inquire in prin- 
ciple into Dasein’s Being-guilty—in other words, if we conceive the idea 
of ‘Guilty!’ in terms of Dasein’s kind of Being. | 

If this is our goal, the idea of ‘Guilty!’ must be sufficiently formalized so 
that those ordinary phenomena of “guilt” which are related to our con- 
cernful Being with Others, will drop out. The idea of guilt must not 
only be raised above the domain of that concern in which we reckon 
things up, but it must also be detached from relationship to any law or 
“ought” such that by failing to comply with it one loads himself with 
guilt. For here too ‘‘guilt” is still necessarily defined as a lack—when 


something which ought to be and which can be is missirg.? To be missing, 


1‘... Grundsein für einen Mangel im Dasein eines Andern, so zwar, dass dieses Grund- 
sein selbst sich aus seinem Wofür als “mangelhaft” bestimmt.’ 

8‘... auf ein Sollen und Gesetz, wogegen sich verfehlend jemand Schuld auf sich lädt. 
Denn auch hier wird die Schuld notwendig noch als Mange bestimmt, als en von 
etwas, was sein soll und kann.” 


P 
; 


II. 2 Being and Time 329 


however, means not-Being-present-at-hand. A lack, as the not-Being- 
present-at-hand of something which ought to be, is a definite sort of Being 
which goes with the present-at-hand. In this sense it is essential that in 
existence there can be nothing lacking, not because it would then be 
perfect, but because its character of Being remains distinct from any 
presence-at-hand. 

Nevertheless, in the idea of ‘Guilty!’ there lies the character of the “not”. 
If the ‘Guilty!’ is something that can definitely apply to existence, then 
this raises the ontological problem of clarifying existentially the character 
of this “not” as a “not”. Moreover, to the idea of ‘Guilty!’ belongs what 
is expressed without further differentiation in the conception of guilt as 
‘having responsibility for—that is, as Being-the basis for . . . Hence we 
define the formally existential idea of the ‘Guilty!’ as ““Being-the-basıs 
for a Being which has been defined by a ‘not’ "—that is to say, as ‘“Being- 
the-basis of a nullity”. The idea of the “not” which lies in the concept of 
guilt as understood existentially, excludes relatedness to anything present- 
at-hand which is possible or which may have been required; furthermore, 
Dasein is altogether incommensurable with anything present-at-hand or 
generally accepted [Geltenden] which is not it itself, or which is not in 
the way Dasein ts—namely, existing; so any possibility that, with regard to 
Being-the-basis for a lack, the entity which is itself such a basis might be 
reckoned up as ‘lacking in some manner’, is a possibility which drops out. 
If a lack, such as failure to fulfil some requirement, has been ‘caused’ in 
a manner characteristic of Dasein, we cannot simply reckon back to there 
being something lacking [Mangelhaftigkeit] in the ‘cause’. Being-the-basis- 
for-something need not have the same “‘not’’-character as the privativum 
which is based upon it and which arises from it. The basis need not 
acquire a nullity of its own from that for which it is the basis (scinem 
Begründeten]. This implies, however, that Being-gutlty does not first 
result from an indebtedness [Verschuldung], but that, on the contrary, indebtedness 
becomes possible only ‘on the basis’ of a primordial Being-guilty. Can something 
like this be exhibited in Dasein’s Being, and how is it at all possible 
existentially ? 

Dasein’s Being is care. It comprises in itself facticity (thrownness), 
existence (projection), and falling. As beix, Dasein is something that has 
been thrown; it has been brought into its “itere”, but not of its own accord. 
As being, it has taken the definite um cf a potentiality-for-D. © | v“ 5} 

11, , . Grundsein für ein durch ein Nirj.t bestir-intes Sein—das heisst Grundsein einer 
Nichtigkeit’. The noun ‘Nichtigkeit’ which might well be translated here as 'notness’, may 
be used in legal contexts where something has been declared ‘null and void’, and can be 


used more es to apply to almost anything that is vacuous, trifling, ephemeral, or 
‘nil’, Heidegger will rule out some of these connotations on H. 285. 


284 


285, 


330 Being and Time II. 2 


has heard itself and has devoted itself to itself, but no? as itself. 1As existent, 
it never comes back behind its thrownness in such a way that it might 
first release this ‘that-it-is-and-has-to-be’ from its Being-its-Self and lead 
it into the “there”. Thrownness, however, does not lie behind it as some. 
event which has happened to Dasein, which has factually befallen and’ 
fallen loose from Dasein again;? on the contrary, as long as Dasein is, 
Dasein, as care, is constantly its “that-ıt-is’. To this entity it has been 
delivered over, and as such it can exist solely as the entity which it ist 
and as this entity to which it has been thus delivered over, it ts, in its 
existing, the basis of its potentiality-for-Being. Although it has not laid 
that basis itself, it reposes in the weight of ir, which is made manifest to it 
as a burden by Dasein’s mood. 

And how is Dasein this thrown basis? Only in that it projects itself 
upo:i possibilities into which i: has been thrown. The Self, which as such 
has to lay the basis for itself, can never get that basis into its power; and 
yet, as existing, it must take over Being-a-basis. To be its uwn thrown 
basis is that potentiality-for-Being which is the issue for care. 

In being a basis--that is, in existing as thrown—Dasein constantly lags 
behind its possibilities. It is never existent d¢fore its basis, but only jrom it 
and as this basis. Thus “Being-a-basis” 1aeans never to have power over 
one’s ownmost Being from the ground up. This “nos” belongs to the exis- 
tentia! AANDE of “thrownness’’. It itself, being a basis, 5 2 nullity of 
itself.” ‘“Nuliity’” does not signify anything like not-Being-preseni-at-hand 
or not-subsisting; what one has in view here is rather a “‘not’’ which is 
constitutive for this Being of Dasein—its thrownness. The character of this 
“not” as a “not”? may be defined cxistentially: in being its Self, Dasein is, 
as a Sel!) the entity that has been thrown. it has been released from its 
basis, 70% through itself but to itself, so as to be as this basis. Dasein is not 
itself the basis of its Being, inasmuch as tùis basis first arises from its own 
projection; rather, as Being-its-Self, it is the Being of its basis.4 This basis 


1 *Seiend ist es als Seinkönnen bestimmt, das sich selbst gehört und doch nicht als es 
selbst sicu zu eigen gegeben hat. u is nerhaps temptu. g to interpret ‘gehört’ as coming 
from the verb ‘gehören’ (‘belong’) rather than ‘hören’ (hear ’); we could then read 

leng: to \iself’ rather ii a has heard i-s2lf?, Our version. however, seems to be favoured 
b the gracumar of this passage. 


* ‘Die Geworlenäeit aber liogi ich totes oho: eis ein tatsächlich vergefalienes und 
vom Dasein wieder losgefailencs Bee, dag cuir iim gescuah Bar 

9 *Es isi ris z existent vor sareni NPG souUu jn UUT au shia und: af ; uteser, Grundsein 
sam jemaat, dey edger sen Salas ey Orori auf le må ichtig eein, Dieses Nicht gehört 
um ecihtenzialen Sinu der Gewarlennui, im inc red-se rend ol ok “lt eine Nicht Egkeit 
zerner seist” Preumab:; ine ng vu dsl SENG yee Se er, (a Tab CULTIINY Tassage, is 


imphied in the ‘never’ of the receding sus 

... Selbst setend ist das | asein das gawer: rene Sei ade ais Seiber. Nicht durch es selbst, 
sondern an os selbst milasıen aus dein, Krn cle, Ane day MET ZU sin. Das Dasein ist nicht 
anočerm seiber Ger Give. seines Seins, ur cessi dus eigenem Do wusl arst entspringt, 


wohl aber ist es ais Selbstsein das Sen dea Grandes.’ 


II. 2 Being and Time 331 


is never anything but the basis for an entity whose Being has to take over 
Being-a-basis. 

Dasein is its basis existently-—that is, in such a manner that it under- 
stands, itself ın terms of possibilities, and, as so understanding itself, is 
that entity which has been thrown. But this implies that in having a 
potentiality-for-Being it always stands in one possibility or another: it 
constantly is not other possibilities, and it has wyaived these in its existentiell 
projection. Not only is the projection, as one that has been thrown, 
determined by the nullity of Being-a-basis; as projection it is itself essentially 
null. This does not mean that it has the ontical property of ‘inconsequent- 
iality’ or “‘worthlessness’; what we have here is rather something existent- 
ially constitutive for the structure of the Being of projection. The nullity 
we have in mind belongs to Dasein’s Being-free for its existentiell pos- 
sibilities. Freedom, however, ts only in the choice of one possibility— 
that is, in tolerating one’s not having chosen the others and one’s not 
being able to choose them. 

In the structure of thrownness, as in that of projection, there lies 
essentially a nullity. This nullity is the basis for the possibility of inau- 
thentic Dasein in its falling; and as falling, every inauthentic Dasein 
factically is. Care itself, in tts very essence, ts permeated with mgt through and 
through. 'Thus_“care’’—Dasein’s Being—means, as thrown projection, 
Being-the-basis of a nullity (and this Being-the-basis is itself null). This 
means that Dasein as such is guilty, if our formally existential definition of 
“guilt” as “Being-the-basis of a nullity” is indeed correct. 

Existential nullity has by no means the character of a privation, where 
something is lacking in comparison with an ideal which has been set up but 
does not get attained in Dasein; rather, the Being of this entity is already 
null as projection; and it is null in advance of [vor] any of the things which it 
can project and which it mostly attains.! This nullity, moreover, is thus 
not something which emerges in Dasein occasionally, attaching itself to 
it as an obscure quality which Dasein might eliminate if it made sufficient 
progress. 

In spite of this, the ontological meaning of the notness [Nichtheit] of this 
existential nullity is still obscure. But this holds also for the ontological 
essence of the “‘not’’ in general. Ontology and logic, to be sure, have exacted 
a great deal from the “not”, and have thus made its possibilities visible 
in a piecemeal fashion; but it itself has not been unveiled ontologically.. 
Ontology came across the “‘not”” and made use of it. But is it so obvious 


1 The negative character to which Heidegger here calls attention is not brought ‘out 
as clearly by the word ‘projection’ (etymologically, ‘throwing forward’) as it is by the 
German ‘entwerfen’ (‘throwing off’ or ‘throwing away’), where the prefix ‘ent-’ indicates 
separation. 


286 


332 Being and Time ~ II. 2 


-that every “‘not” signifies something negative in the sense of a lack? Is its 


” positivity exhausted by the fact that it constitutes ‘passing over’ something? 


Why does all dialectic take refuge in negation, though it cannot provide 
dialectical grounds for this sort of thing ziself, or even just establish it as a 
problem? Has anyone ever made a problem of the ontological source of 
notness, or, prior to that, even sought the mere conditions on the basis of 
which the problem of the ‘“‘not”’ and its notness and the possibility of that 
notness can be raised? And how else are these conditions to be found 
except by taking the meaning of Being in general as a theme and clarifying it? 

The concepts of privation and lack—which, moreover, are not very 
transparent—are already insufficient for the ontological Interpretation 
of the phenomenon of guilt, though if we take them formally. enough, we 
can put them to considerable use. Least of all can we come any closer to 
the existential phenomenon of guilt by taking our orientation from the 
idea of evil, the malum as privatio boni. Just as the bonum and its privatio 
have the same ontological origin in the ontology of the present-at-hand, 
this ontology also applies to the idea of ‘value’, which has been ‘abstracted’ 
from these. 

Not only can entities whose Being is care load themselves with factical 
guilt, but they are guilty in the very basis of their Being; and this Being- 
guilty is what provides, above all, the ontological condition for Dasein’s 
ability to come to owe anything in factically existing. This essential Being- 
guilty is, equiprimordially, the existential condition for the possibility of 
the ‘morally’ good and for that of the ‘morally’ evii—that is, for morality 
in general and for the possible forms which this may take factically. The 
primordial “Being-guilty” cannot be defined by morality, since morality 
already presupposes it for itself. a: 

But what kind of experience speaks for this primordial Being-guilty 
which belangs to Dasein? Nor may we forget the counter-question: ‘is’ 
guilt ‘there’ only if a consciousness of guilt gets awakened, or does not the 
primordial Being-guilty? make itself known rather in the very fact that 
guilt is ‘asleep’? That this primordial Being-guilty remains proximally 
and for the most part undisclosed, that it is kept closed off by Dasein’s 
falling Being, reveals only the aforesaid nullity. Being-guilty is more 
primordial than any knowledge about it. And only because Dasein is 


guilty in the basis of its Being, and closes itself off from itself as something 


thrown and falling, is conscience possible, if indeed the call gives us this 
Being-guilty as something which at bottom we are to understand. | 
The call is the call of care. Being-guilty constitutes the Being to. which 


1 ‘Schuldigsein’. In the earlier editions the ‘sein’ is emphasized by having the type 
spaced out. 


II. 2 Being and Time 333 


we give the name of “‘care’’. In uncanniness Dasein stands together with 
itself primordially. Uncanniness brings this entity face to face with its 
undisguised nullity, which belongs to the possibility of its ownmost 
potentiality-for-Being. To the extent that for Dasein, as care, its Being is 
an issue, it sumrhons itself as a “they” which is factically falling, and 
summons itself from its uncanniness towards its potentiality-for-Being. 


The appeal calls back by calling forth: it calls D; g forth:” it calls Dasein forth to the pos- 
sibility of taking over, in existing, even that thrown entity which it is; it 
calls Dasein back to its thrownness-sa_as to understand this thrownness as 
the null basis which it has to take up into existence. This Calling-back in 
which conscience calls forth, gives Dasein to understand that Dasein 
itself—the null basis for its null projection, standing in the possibility of its 
Being—is to bring itself ba i from its lostness in the “they”; and 
this means that it is guilty. ! 

"But in that case the sort of thing which Dasein gives itself to understand 
would be information about itself. And the hearing which corresponds to 
such a call would be a taking cognizance of the Fact that one is ‘guilty’. If, 
however, the call is to have the character of a summons, does not this way 
of interpreting the conscience lead to a complete perversion of its func- 
tion? Does not a ‘‘summons to Being-guilty’”’ mean a summons to evil? 

One would not want to impose upon the conscience such a meaning for 
the “call”, even in the most violent of Interpretations. But if not, what 
does it mean to ‘summon one to Being-guilty’ ? 

The meaning of the “‘call”’ becomes plain if, in our understanding of it, 
we stick to the existential sense of ‘“‘Being-guilty’, instead of making 
basic the derivative conception of guilt in the sense of an indebtedness 
which has ‘arisen’ through some deed done or left undone. Such a 
demand is not arbitrary, if the call of conscience, coming from Dasein it- 
self, is directed towards that entity alone. But if so, the “summons to 
Being-guilty” signifies a calling-forth to that potentiality-for-Being which 
in each case I as Dasein am already. Dasein need not first load a ‘guilt’ 
upon itself through its failures or omissions; it must only be ‘guilty’ 
authentically —‘guilty’ in the way in which it is.? 

Hearing the appeal correctly is thus tantamount to having an under- 
standing of oneself in one’s ownmost potentiality-for-Being—that is, to 
projecting oneself upon one’s ownmost authentic potentiality for becoming 


1 We follow the newer editions in reading: *. . . ruft es aus der Unheimlichkeit sich 
selbst als faktisch-verfallendes Man auf zu seinem Seinkönnen.’ This is apparently a 
correction of the older version, where one finds ‘Man selbst’ instead of ‘Man’, and might 
be tempted to construe this as a misprint for ‘Man-selbst’ (‘they-self’). 


2 ‘Der Anruf ist vorrufender Rückruf.’ 
3<... es soll nur das “schuldig”’—als welches es ist—eigentlich sein.’ 


287 


288 


334 Being and Time ` II. 2 
guilty.! When Dascin understandingly lets itself be called forth to this 
possibility, this includes its becoming free for the call—its readiness for the 
potentiality of geiting appealed to. In understanding the call, Dasein is 
in thrall to [hérig] tts ownmost possibility af existence. It lias chosen itself. 

In so choosing, Dasein makes possible its ownmost Being-guilty, which 
gemains closed off from the they-self. The common sense of the “they” 
knows only the satisfying of manipulable rules and public norms and the 
failure to satisfy them. It reckons up infractions of them and tries to 
balance them off. It has slunk away from its ownmost Being-guilty so as 
to be able to talk more loudly about making ‘‘mistakes”’, But in the appeal, 
the they-self gets called to [angerufen] the ownmost Being-guilty of the 
Self. Understanding the call is choosing; but it is not a choosing of con- 
science, which as such cannot be chosen. What is chosen.is having-a- 
conscience as Being-free for one’s ownmost Being-guilty. “Understanding 
the appeal’? means “wanting to have a conscience”. 

This does not mean that one wants to have a ‘good conscience’, still 
less that one cultivates the call voluntarily; it means solely that one is 
ready to be appealed to. Wanting to have a conscience is just as far from 
seeking out one’s factical indebtednesses as it is from the tendency to 
liberation from guilt in the sense of the essential guilty’. 

fanting to have a consci 1 the most stentiell pre- 
supposition or the 3 
standing the call, Dasein lets its ownmost Self take action in itself [in sich 
handeln] in terms of that potentiality-for-Being which it has chosen. Only 
so can it de answerable [verantwortlich]. Factically, however, any taking- 
action is necessarily ‘conscienceless’, not only because it may fail to avoid 
some factical moral indebtedness, but because, on the null basis of its 
null projection, it has, in Being with Others, already become guilty 
towards them. Thus one’s wanting-to-have-a-conscience becomes the 
taking-over of that essential consctencelessness within which alone the 
existentiell possibility of being ‘good’ subsists. 

Though the call gives no information, it is not merely critical; it is 
positive, in that itdi tentiality-for-Bein 


Being-guilty. Thus conscience manifests itself as an attestation which 
belongs to m’s Being—an attestation in which conscience calls 
Dasein itself face to face with its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. Is there 


an existentially more concrete way of determining the character of the 


1 *Schuldigwerdenkönnen’. This ‘ownmost authentic’ sense of ‘schuldig werden’ is 
presumably to be contrasted with the sense to whith we have called attention in notes 2 
and 4, p. 327, H. 282 above, and which we hawe expressed by the phrase ‘come to owe’. 
When it seems to us that Heidegger has the authentic sense in mind, we shall express it by 
the phrase “become guilty’, though this device exaggerates a contrast which would not 
be felt so meee by the German reader. 


II. 2 Being and Tims 335 
authentic potentiality-for-Being which has thus been attested? But now 


that we have exhibited a potentiality-for-Being which is attested in | 


Dasein itself, a preliminary question arises: can we claim sufficient 
evidential weight for the way we have exhibited this, as iong as the 


embarrassment of our Interpreting; the œ eseiouce in a one-sided manner 
by tracing it back to Dascin’s consutut: 9s ride ude tin passing over all 
the famular findings of the ordinary ints cena capsciance, is one 
that is still undiminished? 4., Chen, the o varangucn of ceumsntemee, as it 


‘actually’ is, still recogniza::!e at et in the inte. oretiatinn we have given? 
Have we not been all too sure of ourseives ia the invenusucness with which 
we have deduced an idea of ih: conscience from Dhsien’s state of Being? 

The final step of our Interpretation of the conscience is the existential 
delimitation of the authentic potentiaiy-for-Beins: which conscience 
attests. If we are to assure ourselves of a way of access which will make 
such a step possible even for the ordinary understanding of the conscience, 
we must explicitly demonstrate the con: estice hetireen the results of our 
ontological analysis and the everyeay ways in which the conscience is 
experienced. 


159. The Existential Interpretation of the Conscience, and the Way Conscience is 
Ordinarily Interpreted" 


e ee 


world—the call ‚which “summons | Dasein to_its ownmost een renden. 
Being-guilty. And ‚corresponding to this call, wanting-to-häve-a-Gönscience 
has emerged as the way in which the’appeal is understood. These two 
definitions cannot be brought into harmony at once with the ordinary 


interpretation of conscience. Indeed they seem to be in direct conflict with 


it. We call this interpretation of conscience the “ordinary” one [Vulgar] . 


because in characterizing this phenomenon and describing its ‘function’, 
it sticks to what “they” know as the conscience, and how “they” follow it 
or fail to follow it. 

But must the ontological Interpretation agree with the ordinary inter- 
pretation at all? Should not the latter be, in principle, ontologically 
suspect? If indeed Dasein understands itself proximally and for the most 
part in terms of that with which it concerns itself, and if it interprets all 
its ways of behaving as concern, then will not there be falling and con- 
cealment in its interpretation of that very way of its Being which, as a call, 
seeks to bring it back from its lostness in the concerns of the “they” ?? 


1 “Die existenziale Interpretation des Gewissens und dis oulgare Gewissensauslegung’. 

2‘... wird es dann nicht gerade die Weise seines Seins verfallend-verdeckend auslegen, 
die es als Ruf aus der Verlorenheit in die Besorgnisse des Man zurückholen will.’ While we 
feel that the meaning of this sentence is probably as we have represented it, the grammar 
is quite ambiguous. 


20 


290 


336 Being and Time IT. 2 


Everydayness takes Dasein as something ready-to-hand to be concerned 
with—that is, something that gets managed and reckoned up. ‘Life’ is a 
‘business’, whether or not it covers its costs. 

And so with regard to the ordinary kind of Being of Dasein itself, there 


‘is no guarantee that the way of interpreting conscience which springs 


from it or the theories of conscience which are thus oriented, have arrived 
at the right ontological horizon for its Interpretation. In spite of this, even 
the ordinary experience of conscience must somehow—pre-ontologically— 
reach this phenomenon. Two things follow from this: on the one hand, 
the everyday way of interpreting «onscience cannot be accepted as the 
final criterion for the ‘Objectivity’ of an ontological analysis. On the other 
hand, such an analysis has no right to disregard the everyday under- 
standing of conscience and to pass over the anthropological, psychological, 
and theological theories of conscience which have been based upon it. /f 
existential analysis has laid bare the phenomenon of conscience in its 
ontological roots, then precisely in terms of this analysis the ordinary 
interpretations must become intelligible; and they must become intellig- 
ible not least in the ways in which they miss the phenomenon and in the 
reasons why they conceal it. But sincé in the context of the problems of 
this treatise the analysis of conscience is merely ancillary to what is 
ontologically the fundamental question, we must be satisfied with alluding 
to the essential problems when we characterize the connection between 
the existential Interpretation of conscience and the way it is ordinarily 
interpreted. 

In this ordinary interpretation there are four objections which might 
be brought up against our Interpretation of conscience as the summons 
of care to Being-guilty: (1) that the function of conscience is essentially 
critical; (2) that conscience always speaks in a way that is relative tu some 
definite deed which has been performed or willed; (3) that when the 
‘voice’ is experienced, it is never so radically related to Dasein’s Being; 
(4) that our Interpretation takes no account of the basic forms of the 
phenomenon—‘evil’ conscience and ‘good’, that which ‘reproves’ and 
that which ‘warns’. 

Let us begin our discussion with the last of these considerations. In 
all interpretations of conscience, the ‘evil’ or ‘bad’ conscience gets the 
priority : conscience is primarily ‘evil’; such a conscience makes known to 
us that in every experience of conscience something like a ‘Guilty!’ gets 
experienced first. But in the idea of bad conscience, how is this making- 
known of Being-evil understood ? The ‘Experience of conscience’ turns up 
after the deed has been done or left undone. The voice follows the trans- 
gression and points back to that event which has befallen and by which 


II. 2 Being and Time 337 


Dasein has loaded itself with guilt. If conscience makes known a ‘Being- 
guilty’, then it cannot do this by summoning us to something, but it does 
so by remembering the guilt which has been incurred, and referring to it. 

But does the ‘fact’ that the voice comes afterwards, prevent the call 
from being basically a calling-forth? That the voice gets taken as a 
stirring of conscience which follcws after is not enough to prove that we 
understand the phenomenon of conscience primordially. What if factical 
indebtedness were only the occasion for the factical calling of conscience ? 
What if that Interpretation of the ‘evil’ conscience which we have 
described goes only half way? That such is the case is evident from the 
ontological fore-having within whose scope the phenomenon has been 
brought by this Interpretation. The voice is something that turns up; 
it has its position in the sequence of Experiences which are present-at- 
hand, and it follows after the Experience of the deed. But neither the call, 
nor the deed which has happened, nor the guilt with which one is laden, 
is an occurrence with the character of something present-at-hand which 
runs its course. The cail has the kind of Being which belongs to care. In 
the call Dasein ‘is’ ahead of itself in such a way that at the same time it 
directs itself back to its thrownness. Only by first positing that Dasein is 
an intcrconnected sequence of successive Experiences, is it possible to take 
the voice as something which comes afterwards, something later, which 
therefore necessarily refers back. The voice does call back, but it calls 
beyond the deed which has happened, and back to the Being-zuilty into 
which one has bcen thrown, which is ‘earlier’ than any indebtedness. But 
at the same time, this calling-back calls forth to Being-guilty, as something 
to be seized upon in one’s own existence, so that authentic existentiell 
Being-guilty-only follows after’ the call, not vice versa. Bad conscience is 
basically so far from just reproving and pointing back that it rather points 
forward! as it calls one back into one’s thrownness. The order of the sequence in 
which Experiences run their course docs not give us the phenomenal structure of existing. 

If we cannot reach the primordial phenomenon by a characterization 
of ‘bad’ conscience, still less can we do so by a characterization of ‘good’ 
conscience, whether we take this as a self-subsistent? form of conscience 
or as one which is essentially founded upon ‘bad’ conscience. Just as 
Dasein’s ‘Being-evil’ would be made known to us in the ‘bad’ conscience, 
the ‘good’ conscience must have made known its ‘Being-good’. It is easy to see 
that the conscience which used to be an ‘efHuence of the divine power’ now 
becomes a slave of Pharisaism. Such a conscience would let a man say of 


l ‘yorweisend’. We have followed English idiom in translating ‘vorweisen’ as ‘point 
forward’ and ‘yorrufen’ as ‘call forth’; but the prefix ‘vor-’ is the same in both cases, and 
means ‘forward’ as opposed to ‘backward’. 

2 ‘selbständige’. See note 1, p. 153, H. 117 and note 1, p. 351, H. 303. 


Qt 


292 


338 | Being and Tune II. 2 


himself “I am good’; who else can say this than the good man himself, 
and who would be less willing to affirm it? But if this impossible con- 
clusion is drawn from the idea of the good conscience, the fact that ‘Being- 
guilty” is what the conscience calls, only comes to the fore. 

To escape ihis conclusion, the “2cod’ conscience has b..zn Interpreted 
aš a privaver of the ‘bad’ one, se denne zs ‘an Experienced lack of bad 
conscience’ V'i This would make ir ai: experience of noi having the call 

nen up tior is, of my having notbing with which to reproach myself. 
But how is such a ‘lack’ ‘Experienced’? Tuis supposed Experience is by no 
means the experiencing of a call; it is rather a making-certain! that a 
deed attri!:ite) to Dasein has not been perpetrated by it and that Dasein 
is therefore noi guilty. Becoming certain that one has not done something, 
has by no means the character of a couscience-phenomenon. It can, how- 
ever, signify rather that one is forgetting one’s conscience—-in other words, 
that one is cr:erging from the possibility of being able to be appealed to. 
In the ‘cerus’ here mentioned lurks the tranquillizing suppression of 
one’s wanting to have a conscfence—that is, of understanding one’s 
ownmost and constant Being-guilty. The ‘good’ conscience is neither a 
self-subsistent form of conscience, nor a founded form of conscience; in 
short, it is not a conscience-phenomenon at all. 

In so far as talk about a ‘good’ conscience arises from everyday Dasein’s 
way of experiencing the conscience, everyday Dasein merely betrays 
thereby that even when it speaks of the ‘bad’ conscience it basically fails 
to reach the phenomenon., For the idea of the ‘bad’ conscience 15 oriented 
factically by that of the ‘good’ conscience. The everyday interpretation 
keeps within the dimension of concernfully reckoning up ‘guilt’ and 
‘innocence’ [“‘Unschuld’’} and balancing them off. This, then, is the 
horizon within which the voice of conscience gets ‘Experienced’. 

In characterizing what is primordial in the ideas of ‘bad’ and ‘good’ 
conscience, we have also decided as to the distinction between a conscience 
which points forward and warns and one which points back and reproves. 
The idea of the warning conscience seems, of course, to come closest to 
the phenomenon of the summons. It shares with this the character of 
pointing forward. But this agreement is just an illusion. When we exper- 
lence a warning conscience, the voice is regarded in turn as merely oriented 
towards the deed which has been willed, from which it seeks to preserve 
us. But the warning, as a check on what we have willed, is possible only 
because the ‘warning’ call is aimed at Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being— 
that is, at its understanding of itself in Being-guilty; not until we have such 


t In this paragraph Heidegger takes pains to disassociate ‘Gewissen’ (‘conscience’) from 
the adjective ‘gewiss’ (‘certain’) and its derivatives—‘Sichvergewissern’ (‘making- 
certain’), ‘Gewisswerden’ (‘becoming certain’), and ‘Gewissheit’ (‘certainty’). 


II. 2 Being and Time 339 


understanding does ‘what we have willed’ get shattered. The conscience 
which warns us has the function of regulating from moment to moment 
our remaining free from indebtednesses.! In the experience of a ‘warning’ 
conscience the tendency of its call is seen only to the extent that it remains 
accessible to the common sense of the “they”. 

The third consideration which we have mentioned invokes the fact that 
the everyday experience of the conscience has no acquaintance with anything 
like getting summoned to Being-guilty. This must be conceded. But does 
this everyday experience thus give us any guarantee that the full possible 
content of the call of the voice of conscience has been heard therein? 
Does it follow from this that theories of conscience which are based on the 
ordinary way of experiencing it have made certain that their ontological 
horizon for analysing this phenomenon is an appropriate one? Does not 
falling, which is an essential kind of Being for Dasein, show us rather that 
ontically this entity understands itself proximally and for the most part 
in terms of the horizon of concern, but that ontologically, it defines 
“Being” in the sense of presence-at-hand? This, however, leads to cover- 
ing up the phenomenon in two ways: what one sees in this theory is a 
sequence of Experiences or ‘psychical processes’—a sequence whose kind 
of Being is for the most part wholly indefinite. In such experience the 
conscience is encountered as an arbiter and admonisher, with whom 
Dasein reckons and pleads its cause. 

When Kant represented the conscience as a ‘court of justice’ and made 
this the basic guiding idea in his Interpretation of it, he did not do so by 
accident; this was suggested by the idea of moral /aw—although his 
conception of morality was far removed from utilitarianism and eudae- 
monism. Even the theory of value, whether it is regarded formally or 
materially, has as its unexpressed ontological presupposition a ‘metaphysic 
of morals’ —that is, an ontology of Dasein and existence. Dasein is regarded 
as an entity with which one might concern oneself, whether this “concern” 
has the sense of ‘actualizing values’ or of satisfying a norm. 

If one is to invoke the full range of what the everyday experience of 
conscience—as the only higher court for the Interpretation of conscience— 
is acquainted with, this cannot be justified unless one has considered 
beforehand whether the conscience can ever become authentically 
accessible here at all. 

Thus the further objection that the existential Interpretation overlooks 
the fact that the call of conscience always relates itself to some definite 
deed which has been either ‘actualized’ or willed, also loses its force. 


1‘Das warnende Gewissen hat die Funktion der momentweisen Regelung eines 
Freibleibens von Verschuldungen.’ The carlier editions contradict this by writing 
‘... hat nicht die Funktion .. .’ 


293 


294 


340 Being and Time II. 2 


It cannot be denied that the call is often experienced as having such a 
tendency. It remains questionable only whether this experience of the 
call permits it to ‘proclaim’ itself fully. In the common-sense interpreta- 
tion, one may suppose that one is sticking to the ‘facts’; but in the end, 
by its very common sense, this interpretation has restricted the call’s 
disclosive range. As little as the ‘good’ conscience lets itself be put in the 
service of a ‘Pharisaism’, just as little may the function of the ‘bad’ con- 
science be reduced to indicating indebtednesses which are present-at-hand 
or thrusting aside those which are possible. This would be as if Dasein 
were a ‘household’ whose indebtednesses simply need to be balanced off 
in an orderly manner so that the Self may stand ‘by’ as a disinterested 
spectator while these Experiences run their course. 

If, however, that which is primary in the call is not a relatedness to a 
guilt which is factically ‘present-at-hand’, or to some guilt-charged deed 
which has been factically willed, and if accordingly the ‘reproving’ and 
‘warning’ types of conscience express no primordial call-functions, then 
we have also undermined the consideration we mentioned first, that the 
existential Interpretation fails to recognize the ‘essentially’ critical char- 
acter of what the conscience does. This consideration too is one that 
springs from catching sight of the phenomenon in a manner which, 
within certain limits, is genuine; for in the content of the call, one can 
indeed point to nothing which the voice ‘positively’ recommends and 
imposes. But how are we to understand this positivity which is missing in 
what the conscience does? Does it follow from this that conscience has a 
‘negative’ character? 

We miss a ‘positive’ content in that which is called, because we expect 
to be told something currently useful about assured possibilities of ‘taking action’ 
which are available and calculable. This expectation has its basis within the 
horizon of that way of interpreting which belongs to common-sense 
concern—a way of interpreting which forces Dasein’s existence to be 
subsumed under the idea of a business procedure that can be regulated. 
Such expectations (and in part these tacitly underlie even the demand 
for a matertal ethic of value as contrasted with one that is ‘merely’ formal) 
are of course disappointed by the conscience. The call of conscience fails 
to give any such ‘practical’ injunctions, solely because it summons Dasein 
to existence, to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self. With the 
maxims which one might be led to expect—maxims which could be 
reckoned up unequivocally—the conscience would deny to existence 
nothing less than the very possibility of taking action. But because the con- 
science manifestly cannot be ‘positive’ in this manner, neither does it 
function ‘just negatively’ in this same manner. The call disc’ >ses nothing 


II. 2 Being and Time 341 
which could be either positive or negative as something with which we 
can concern ourselves; for what it has in view is a Being which is ontologically 
quite different—nz.mely, existence. On the other hand, when the call is 
rightly understood, it gives us that which in the existential sense is the 
‘most positive’ of all—namely, the ownmost possibility which Dasein 
can present to itself, as a calling-back which calls it forth into its factical 
potentiality-for-being-its-Self at the time. To hear the call authentically, 
signifies bringing oneself into a factical taking-action. But only by setting 
forth the existential structure implied in our understanding of the appeal 
when we hear it authentically, shall we obtain a fully adequate Interpreta- 
tion of what is ealled in the call. 


We must first show how the only phenomena with which the ordinary . 


interpretation has any familiarity point back to the primordial meaning 
of the call of conscience when they are understood in a way that is onto- 
logically appropriate; we must then show that the ordinary interpretation 
springs from the limitations of the way Dasein interprets :tself in falling; 
and, since falling belongs to care itself, we must also show that = 
interpretation, in spite of all its obviousness, ts by no means accidental. 

In criticizing the ordinary interpretation of the conscience ontologically, 
one might be subject to the misunderstanding of supposing that if one 
demonstrates that the everyday way of experiencing the conscience is not 
existentially primordial, ore will have made some judgment as to the 
existentiell ‘moral quality’ of any Dasein which maintains itself in that 
kind of experience. Just as little as existence is necessarily and directly 
impaired by an ontologically inadequate way of understanding the 
conscience, so little does an existentially appropriate Interpretation of the 
conscience guarantee that one has understood the call in an existentiell 
manner. It-is no less possible to be serious when one experiences the con- 
science in the ordinary way than not to be serious when one’s understand- 
ing of it is more primordial. Nevertheless, the Interpretation which is 
more primordial existentially, also discloses possibilities for a more pri- 
mordial existentiell understanding, as long as our ontological conceptualiza- 
tion does not let itself get cut off from our ontica’ experience. 


{ 60. The Existential Structure of the Authentic Potentiality-for-Being which ts 
Attested in the Conscience 

The existential Interpretation of conscience is to exhibit an attestation 
of Dasein’s ownmost potentiality-for-Being—an attestation which ts 
[seiende] in Dasein itself. Conscience attests not by making something 
known in an undifferentiated manner, but by calling forth and sum- 
moning us to Being-guilty. That which is so attested becomes ‘grasped’ 


295 


342 Being and Time II. 2 


in the hearing which understands the call undisguisedly in the sense it 
has itself intended. The understanding of the appeal is a mode of Dasein’s 
Being, and only as such does it give us the phenomenal content of what the 


call of conscience attests. The authentic understanding ofthe call has been 
characterized as ‘‘wanting to have a conscience”, This is a way of letting 
which Dasein itself attests. The existential structure of this must now be 
laid bare. Only so can we proceed to the basic constitution of the authenti- 
city of Dasein’s existerge as disclosed in Dasein itself. 


Wanting to_h a conscience is, as an understanding of oneself in 
disclosed, This disclosedness is constituted by discourse and state-of-mitnd, 
as well as by understanding. To understand in an existentiell manner 
implies projecting oneself in each case upon one’s ownmost factical pos- 
sibilit+ of having the potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world. But the poten- 
tiality-for-Being is understood only by existing in this possibility. 

What kind of mood corresponds to such understanding ? Understanding 
the call discloses one’s own Dasein in the uncanniness of its individualiza- 
tion. The uncanniness which is revealed in understanding and revealed 
along with it, becomes genuinely disclosed by the state-of-mind of anxiety 
which belongs to that understanding. The fact of the anxiety of conscience, 
gives us phenomenal confirmation that in understanding the call Dasein 
is brought face to face with its own uncanniness. Wanting-to-have-a- 
conscience becomes a readiness for anxiety. 

The third essential item in disclosedness is discourse. The call itself is a 
primordial kind of discourse for Dasein; but there is no corresponding 
counter-discourse in which, let us say, one talks about what the con- 
science has said, and pleads one’s cause. In hearing the call understand- 
ingly, one denies oneself any counter-discourse, not because one has been 
assailed by some ‘obscure power’, which suppresses one’s hearing, but 
because this hearing has appropriated the content of the call uncon- 
cealedly. In the call one’s constant Being-guilty is represented, and in this 
way the Self is brought back from the loud idle talk which goes with the 
common sense of the ‘‘they”. Thus the mode of Articulative discourse 
which belongs to wanting to have a conscience, is one of reticence. Keeping 
silent has been characterized as an essential possibility of discourse. 


‘Anyone who keeps silent when he wants to give us to understand some- 


thing, must ‘have something to say’. In the appeal Dasein gives itself to 
understand its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. This calling is therefore a 
keeping-silent. The discourse of the conscience never comes to utterance. 


s$ 


II. 2 Being and Time 343 


Only in keeping silent does the conscience call; that is to say, the call 
comes from the soundlessness 6f uncanniness, and the Dasein which it 
summons is called back into the stillness of itself, and called back as some- 
thing that is to become still. Only in reticence, therefore, is this silent 
discourse understood appropriately in wanting to have a conscience. It 
takes the words away from the common-sense idle talk of the “they”. 

The common-sense way of interpreting the conscience, which ‘sticks 
rigorously to the facts’, takes the silent discourse of the conscience as an 
occasion for passing it off as something which is not at all ascertainable 
or present-at-hand. The fact that “they”, who hear and understand 
nothing but loud idle talk, cannot ‘report’ any call, is held against the 
conscience on the subterfuge that it is ‘dumb’ and manifestly not present- 
at-hand. With this kind of interpretation the ‘‘they”’ merely covers up its 
own failure to hear the call and the fact that its ‘hearing’ does not reach 
very far. 


The disclosedness of Dasein in wanting to have a conscience, is thus. 
constituted by an::iety as state-of-mind, by understanding as a projection 
n one’s ownmost Bein: l 


of oneself u -guilty, and by discourse as reticence. 
This distinctive an thentic disclosedness, which is attested in Dasein 
itself by its conscience—this relicent self-projection upon one’s ownmost Being- 


fuilty, in which one ts or anxiety—we Call ‘resoluteness’’. 


esoluteness is a distinctive mode of Dasein’s disclosedness.! In an 
earlier passage, however, we have Interpreted disclosedness existentially 
as the primordial truth, Such truth is primarily not a quality of ‘judgment’ 
nor of any definite way of behaving, but something essentially constitutive 
for Being-in-the-world as such. Truth must be conceived as a fundamental 
existentiale. In our ontological clarification of the proposition that ‘Dasein 
is in the truth’ we have called attention to the primordial disclosedness of 
this entity as the truth of existence; and for the delimitation of its character 
we have referred to the analysis of Dasein’s authenticity. 

In resoluteness we have now arrived at that truth of Dasein which is 
most primordial because it is authentic. Whenever a “there” is disclosed, 
its whole Being-in-thc-world—that is to say, the world, Being-in, and the 
Self which, as an ‘I ain’, this entity is—is disclosed with equal primord- 
iality.? Whenever the world is disclosed, entities within-the-world have 


“1 The etymological connection between ‘Entschlossenh-it’ (‘resoluteness’) and ‘Ersch- 
lossenheit’ (‘disclosedness’) is not to be overlooked. l , = 

3 ‘Die Erschlossenheit des Da erschliesst gleichursprünglich das je ganze In-der-Welt- 
sein, das heisst die Welt, das In-Sein und das Selbst, das als “ich bin” dieses Seiende ist.’ 
It is not clear grammatically whether ‘dieses Seiende’ or the pronoun ‘das’ is the subject 
of the final clause, or whether ‘this entity’ is ‘Dasein’ or ‘Being-in’. The grammatical 
function of the ‘als “ich bin” ’ is also doubtful. In support of our interpretation, consult 


H. 54, 114, 117, 267. 


297 


344 Being and Time i II. 2 
been discovered already. The discoveredness of the ready-to-hand and the 
present-at-har._ is based on the disclosedness of the world =i! for if the 
current totality of involvements is to be freed, this requires that signifi- 
cance be understood beforehand. In understanding significance, concernful 


Dasein submits itself circumspectively to what it encounters as ready- | 


to-hand. Any discovering of a totality of involvements goes back to a 


nn. 


es 


“for-the-sake-of-which” ;and onthe understanding of such a“for-the-sake- ; 
of-which” is based in turn the understanding of significance as the disclosed- _ 


ness of the current world. In seeking shelter, sustenance, livelihood, we 


do so “for the sake of” constant possibilities of Dasein which are very close ` 
to it;! upon these the entity for which its own Being is an issue, has already : 


projected itself. Thrown into its ‘there’, every Dasein has been factically 
submitted to a definite ‘world’—its ‘world’. At the same tirne those facti- 


cal projections which are closest to it, have been guided by its concernful - 


lostness in the “they”. To this lostness, one’s Dascin eal, and: 
this a be understood in the way of resoluteness. But in that case 


this authentic disclosedness modifies with equal primordiality both the way 
in which the ‘world’ is discovered (and this is founded upon that dis- 
closedness) and the way in which the Dasein-with of Others is disclosed. 
The ‘world’ which is ready-to-hand does not become another one ‘in its 
content’, nor does the circle of Others get exchanged for a new one; but 
both one’s Being towards the ready-to-hand understandingly and con- 
cernfully, and one’s solicitous Being with Others, are now given a 
definite character in terms of their ownmost “potentiality-for-Being- 
their-Selves. 


„Resoluteness, as authentic Being-one’s-Sel, detach Dasein from 
i d, nor does it isolate it so that it becomes a free-floating “I”. And 


uld it, when resoluteness as authentic disclosedness, is authentically 
thing else than Being-in-the-world? Resoluteness brings the Self right into 


its current concernful Being-alongside what is ready-to-hand, and pushes 
it into solicitous Being with Others. 


In the light of the “for-the-sake-of-which” of one’s self-chosen potent-. 


iality-for-Being, resolute Dasein frees itself for its world. Dasein’s resolute- 


ness towards itself is what first makes it possible to let t thers who are 
with it in their ownmost potentiality-for-Being, and .to_co-disclose 


this potentiality in the solicitude which leaps forth and liberates. When 
: ute, Only by 


asein is resolute, it me the ‘conscience’ of Others. 
authentically Being-their-Selves in resoluteness can people authentically 
ey ESS As sty “2 sete ng gee R `: 

be with one another-—not by ambiguous and jealous stipulations and 


1 ‘Das Umwillen des Unterkommens, des Unterhalts, des Fortkommens sind nächste 
und ständige Möglichkeiten des Daseins .. .’ 


~ 


II. 2 Ya “mE ad en 945 


un. 


take. 
esoluteness, by its ontological essence, is always the eles o 
some Tunn oma sim es Dasein as an 
entity is its existence. Resoluteness ‘exists’ only as a resolution [Entschluss] 
which understandingly projects itself. But on what basis does raise 
disclose ftself in resoluteness ? On what is it to resolve?! Only the resclutiè 
itself can give the answer. One would completely misundersiand Te 
phenomenon of resoluteness if one should want to suppose tha. this ccn- 
sists simply in taking up possibilities which have been propesed and 
recommended, and seizing hold of them. The resolution i is rectsely ihe dis- 
closive projection and termination 9 


resolutene ess, the inde characteristic of ev entia Berg 


into which Dasein = been factically throw:, is something ‘that neces- 


NN re en m er e 


sarily belongs, Only in a resolution is re ae sure of itseil. 


entiell indefinite: Lese © ss of resoluteness never makes itself Gehalts exeopt i in & 
resolution; 2; yctirhas, all the istential definiteness. 


What one resoives upon in resoluteness has been prescribed ontologically 
in the existentia! itv of Dasein in general as a otentiality-for-Being in the 


männer of concer solicitude. As care, however, Daseia has been 
Determined bv facticity and falling. Disclosed !n its ‘there’, it maintains 
itself both ir truth and in untruth with equal primordiality.! This 
‘really’ holds ir particular for resoluteness as authentic truth. Resoluteness 
appropriates untruth authentically. Dasein is already in irresoluteness 
[Unentschlossenheit], and soon, perhaps, will be in it again. The term 
“irresolutencss’ merely expresses that phenomenon which we have Inter- 
iciup-surrendered to the way in which things have been 
prevalently interpreted by the “they”. Dasein, as a they-self, gets ‘lived’ 
by the common-sense _ambiguity of that publicness in which nobody 


resolves upon anything but which has always made its decision.? “Reso- 
luteness” signifies letting oneself be summoned out ı of one’s lostness in the 
“they”. The irresoluteness of the “they”? remains dominant notwith- 


re | et <page 


ie oe Or 
standing, but it cannot impugr resolute existence. In _the counter- 
concept to_irresoluteness, a hc as existentially understood, 


mam > nn cate m 


we do.not have in mind any ontico-psychical char acteristic in the sense of 
Being-burdened with inhibitions, Eyen resolutions remain dependent upon 


1 ‘Aber woraufhin erschliesst sich das Dasein in der Entschlossenheit? Wozu soll es 
sich entschlicssen?’ (For similar constructions with ‘woraufhin’ etc. and ’erschliessen’, 
see H. 141, 143, 145 above.) 

2 ‘Das Dasein wird als Man-selbst von der verständigen Zweideutigkeit der Öffentlich- 
keit “gelebt”, in der sich niemand entschliesst, und die doch schon immer beschlossen 
hat.’ The etymological connection between ‘entschliesst’ and ‘beschlossen’ is lost in our 
translation. 


TGC 


é 


800 


946 Being and T:me II. 2 


the “they” and its world. The understanding of this is one of the things that 
— > < 
a resolution ses, irearsmuch as resoluteness is what first gives authentic 
transpare:_-y © Dasein. In resoluteness the issue for Dasein is its ownmost 


potentia!:: -for-Being, whe WW 2. something thrown, car project itself 
only upon definite faciie’ posshilities. Resolution does not withdraw 
itself from ‘ac: ality’, but ciscovers first what is factically possible; and it 
ssible for it as its ownmiost 
potentiality-f_ Be. hey”. The existential atte of any" 
possib e items constitutive for stential 
phenomenon which we call a ‘‘S:tyation’’ and which we have hitherto 
passed over. ABs 

In the term “Situation” (‘‘situation’”—‘to be in a situation’) there is 
an overtone of a significaticn that is spatial.! We shall not try to eliminate 
this from the existential concepticn for such an overtone is also implied 
in the ‘there’ of Dasein. Being-in-the-world has a spatiality of its own, 
characterized by the phenomena of de-severance and directionality. 
Dasein ‘makes room’ in sc far as it factically exists.*!V But spatiality of the 
kind which belongs to Dasein, and on the basis of which existence always 
determines its ‘location’, is grounded in the state of Being-in-the-world, 
for which disclosedness is primarily constitutive. Just as the spatiality of 
the ‘‘ is grounded in disclosedness, the Situation has its foundations 
in resoluteness, The Situation is the “there” which is disclosed in resolute- 
ness—the “there” as which the existent entity is there. It is not a frame- 
work present-at-hand in which Dasein occurs, or into which it might even 
just bring itself, Far removed from any present-at-hand mixture of circum» 
stances and accidents which we encounter, the Situation only through 
‘eroluteness and In it. The current ctcal involvement character of the 
circumstances discloses itself to the Self only when that involvement- 
character is such that one has resolved upon the “there” as which 
that Self, in existing, has to be.? When what we call “accidents” 
befall from the with-world and the environment, they can be-fall only 
resoluteness.® | 

For the “they” however, the Situation is essentially something that has been 


closed off.“ The “they” knows only the ‘general situation’, loses itself in those 
‘ °,e `; : : 
opportunities’ which are closest to it, and pays Dasein’s way by a reckoning 


rn nn. 


1 The German words ‘Situation’ and ‘Lage’ will be translated by ‘Situation’ and 
‘situation’ respectively. 

4 “Entschlossen für das Da, als welches das Selbst existierend zu sein hat, erschliesst sich 
ihm erst der jeweilige faktische Bewandtnischarakter der Umstände.’ 

3 ‘Nur der Ent-schlossenheit kann das aus der Mit- und Umwelt zu-fallen, was wir 
Zufälle nennen.’ Literally a ‘Zufall’ (‘acciden:’) is something that ‘falls to’ something, or 
‘befalls’ it. (Com the Latin ‘accidens’, which has basically the same meaning). 

4 ‘verschlossen’, Contrast ‘erschlossen’ (‘disclosed’) and ‘entschlossen’ (‘resolved’). 


II, 2 Being and Time 347 
up of ‘accidents’ which it fails to recognize, deems its own achievement, 


and passes offassuch ~ MM MT a 


Resoluteness brings the Being of the “there” into the existence of its 


Situation. Indeed er ger structur hat authentic 
Tg eel 
potentiality- the conscience ee to ‚have a a 


es 


=. 


Situation. 7 This is existential positivity which the call of conscience e possesses 
when Tightly understood, gives us at the same time an insight: it makes 
us see to what extent we fail to recognize the disclosive character of the 
conscience if the tendency of the call is restricted to indebtednesses which 
have already occurred or which we have before us; it also makes us see 
to what extent the concrete understanding of the voice of conscience is 
only seemingly transmitted to us if this restriction is made. When our 
understandin the appeal is Interpreted existentially as resoluten 


the conscience i that kind of Being—included in the very 
ooo ee 
basis of Dasein®—in which Dasein_makes possible. for 1 its factical 


existence, thus attesting its ownmost potentia ing. 

This phenomenon which we have exhibited as “resoluta can hardly 
be confused with an empty ‘habitus’ or an indefinite ‘velleity’. Resoluteness 
does not first take cognizance of a Situation and put that Situation before 


itself; it has put itself i Situation already a po e a 
already taking action. The term ‘take action’? is one which we are purposely 
avoi i . For in the first place this term must be taken so broadly that 


also emi of resistance. In the 
second place, it suggests a misunderstanding in the ontology of Dasein, as 


if resoluteness were a special way of behaviour belonging to the practical 


faculty as contrasted with one that is theoretical. Care, however, as 


1 ‘Es kennt nur die “allgemeine Lage”, verliert sich an die nächsten “Gelegenheiten” We 
bestreitet das Dasein aus der Verrechnung der “‘Zufalle”, die es, sie verkennend, für die 
eigene Leistung hält und ausgibt.’ We have preserved the grammatical ambiguity of the 
pronouns ‘die’ and ‘es’. 

2',,. als die im Grunde des Daseins beschlossene Seinsätt . . ° The participle ‘be- 

x schlossene’, which i is etymologically akin to ‘erschlossen’, etc., may mean either ‘included 
‚.or ‘decided upon‘, as we have seen on H. 299. Very likely ‘both meanings are here in- 
“tended. 

3 ‘Die Entschlossenheit stellt sich nicht erst, kenntnisnehmend, eine Situation vor, 
sondern hat sich schon in sie gestellt." Our rather literal translation brings out the contrast 
between ‘sich stellen in...’ (‘put itself in . . .’) and ‘sich stellen... vor... .’ (‘put before 
itself’. . .’), but fails to bring out the important sense of the latter expression: to represent’ 
or ‘to form an idea of”. 

«‘“Handeln” '. Far from avoiding this term, Heidegger has used it quite frequently. 
But he is avoiding it as a possible substitute for the term ‘Entschlossenheit’. 


301 


348 Being and Time II. 2 


concernful solicitude, so primordially and wholly envelops Dasein’s Being 
that it must already be presupposed as a whole when we distinguish 
between theoretical and practical behaviour; it cannot first be built up 
out of these faculties by a dialectic which, because it is existentially 
ungrounded, is necessarily quite baseless. Resoluteness, however,ts only that 


authenticity which, in care, is the object of care [in der Sorge gesorgte], and which 
oo ee u Tr ts .» e 
is possi -the authenticity of care itself. 


To present the factical existentiell possibilities in their chief features 
and interconnections, and to Interpret them according to their existential 
structure, falls among the tasks of a thematic existential anthropology.*V 
For the purposes of the present investigation as a study of fundamental 
ontology, it is enough if that authentic potentiality-for-Being which 
conscience attests for Dasein itself in terms of Dasein itself, is defined 
existentially. 

Now that resoluteness has been worked out as Being-guilty, a self- 
projection in which one is re | ready for anxiety,! our investiga- 
tion has been put in a position for defining the ontological meaning of 
that potentiality which we have been seeking—Dasein’s authentic poten- 
tiality-for-Being-a-whole. By now the authenticity of Dasein is neither an 


mpty term nor an idea which someone has fabricated. But even so, as 
an authentic potentiality- or-Being-a-whole, the authentic Being-towards- 
death which we have deduced existentially still remains a purely exist- 
ential project for which Dasein’s attestation is missing, Only when such 


attestation has been found will our investigation suffice to exhibit (as its 
problematic requires) an authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole, exist- 


tially confirmed and clarified—a potentiality which belongs to Dasein. 
For only when this entity has become phenomenally accessible in its 
authenticity and its totality, will the question of the meaning of the 


Being of this entity, to whose existence there belongs in general an under- 
standing of Being, be based upon something which will stand any test. 


‚1 ‘Mit der Herausarbeitung der Entschlossenheit als des verschwiegenen, angstbereiten 
Sichentwerfens auf das eigenste Schuldigsein . . .' The earlier editions have *. . . dem 
verschwiegenen, angstbereiten Sichentwerfen auf. . .’ 


III 


DASEIN’S AUTHENTIC POTENTIALITY-FOR-BEING- 
A-WHOLE, AND TEMPORALITY AS THE 
ONTOLOGICAL MEANING OF CARE 


161. A Preliminary Sketch of the Methodological Step from the Definition of 
Dasein’s Authentic Being-a-whole to the Laying-bare of Temporality as a Phe- 
nomenon 


rn. ee eee oe 


been projected existentially. By analysing this phenomenon, we have 
revealed that authentic Being-towards-death is anticipation,’ Dasein’s 
authentic potentiality-for-Being, in its existentiell attestation, has been 
How are these two phenomena of anticipation and resoluteness to be 
brought together? Has not our ontological projection of the authentic 
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole led us into a dimension of Dasein which 
lies far from the phenomenon of resoluteness? What can death and the 
‘concrete Situation’ of taking action have in common? In attempting to 
bring resoluteness and anticipation forcibly together, are we not seduced 
into an intolerable and quite unphenomenological construction, for which 
we can no longer claim that it has the character of an onto'ozical pro- 
jection, based upon the phenomena? l 

Any superficial binding together of the two phenomena is excluded. 
There still remains one way out, and this is the only possible method: 


nn 


»wnmost existen te of Being, point forward to anticipatory resoluteness 
as its o st authentic possibility? Whataf resoħrteness, in accordance 


but upon that uttermost possibitify which ti: ahead of cvery factical 


eee es R.. o m —.. — 


potentiality-for-Being of Dasein,? and, a -sh. enters more or Tess 


F shlossenheit aufgezeigt und zugleich existenzial inicrpretiert? In the earlier editions 
words "aufgezeigt und zugleich e:istenz.al interpretiert’ are inserted between “Bezeu- 
ng’ and ‘wurde’, not in their present position. 
a*,.. die allem faktischen Seinkönnen des Daseins vorgeiagert ist... .* Cf. note 1, p. 309, 
ti. 259 above. 


302 


350 Being and Time il. 3 
undisguisedly into every potentiality-for-Being of which Dasein factically 
takes hold? What if it is only in the anticipation of [zum] death that 
resoluteness, as Dasein’s authentic truth, has reached the authentic certainty | 
which belongs to it? What if it is only in the anticipation if death that all the 
factical ‘anticipatoriness’ of resolving would be authentically understood— 
in other words, that it would be caught up with in an existentiell way ?! 

In our existential Interpretation, the entity which has been presented 
to us as our theme has Dasein’s kind of Being, and cannot be pieced to- 
gether into something present-at-hand out of pieces which are present-at- 
hand. So long as we do not forget: this, every step in our Interpretation 
must be guided by the idea of existence. What this signifies for the question 
of the possible connection between anticipation and resoluteness, is 
nothing less than the demand that we should project these existential 
phenomena upon the existentiell possibilities which have been delineated 
in them, and ‘think these possibilities through to the end’ in an existential 
manner. If we do this, the working-out of anticipatory resoluteness as a 
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole such that this potentiality is authentic and 
is possible in an existentiell way, will lose the character of an arbitrary 
construction. It will have become a way of Interpreting whereby Dasein 
is liberated for its uttermost possibility of existence. 

In taking this step, the existential Interpretation makes known at the 
same time its ownmost methodological character. Up til now, except for 
some remarks which were occasicnally necessary, we have deferred 
explicit discussions of method. Our first task was to ‘go fo ch” towards the 
phenomena. But, before laying bare the meaning of the Being of an entity 
which has been revealed in its basic phenomenal conteui, we must stop 
for a while in the course of our investigation, not for the purpose cf 
‘resting’, but so that we may be impelled the more keenly. 

Any genuine method is based on viewing in advance in an appropriate 
way the basic constitution of the ‘object’ te be disclosed, or of the domain 
within which the object lies. Thus any genuinely methodical consideration— 
which is to be distinguished from empty discussions of technique—must 
likewise give information about the kind of Being of the entity which has 
been taken as our theme. The clarification of the methodological pos- 
sibilities, requirements, and limitations of the existential analytic in 
generai, can alone secure the transparency which is necessary if we are to 


1 ‘Wenn im Vorlaufen zor. Tode erst alle faktische “*Vorläufigkeit'”” des Entschliessens 
eigentlich verstanden, das heisst existenziell eingeholt wäre?’ Our translation of “Vor- 
jaufen’ as ‘anticipation’ again ‘fails to bring out the metaphor of ‘running ahead’, with 
which the notion of ‘catching up’ is here clearly connected. (Cf. our note 3, p. 306, H. 
262 above.) Similarly our transiation of ‘Vorlaufigkeit’ as ‘anticipatoriness’, which brin 
out the connection with ‘vorlaufen’, is out of line with our usual translation of the ad- 
jective ‘vorläufig’ as ‘provisional’. 


II. 3 Beng and Time 351 
take the basic step of unveiling the meaning of the Being of care. But the 
Interpretation of the ontological meaning of care must be performed on the basis of 
envisaging phenomenologtcally in a full and constant manner Dasein’s existential 
constitution as we have exhibited it up till now. 

Ontologically, Dasein is in principle different from everything that is 
present-at-hand or Real. Its ‘subsistence’ is not based on *he substan- 
tiality of a substance but on the ‘Self-subsistence' of the existing „elf, whose 
Being has been conceived as care.! The phenomenon of the Self—a 
phenomenon which is included in care—needs to be defined existentially 
in a way which is primordial and authentic, in contrast to our preparatory 
exhibition of the inauthentic they-self, Along with this, we must establish 
what possible ontological questions are to be directed towards the ‘Self’, 
if indeed it is neither substance nor subject. 

In this way, the phenomenon of care will be adequately clarified for 
the first time, and we shall then interrogate it as to its ontological meaning. 
When this meaning has been determined, temporality will have beén laid 
bare. In exhibiting this, we are not led into out-of-the-way and sequestered 
domains of Dasein; we merely get a conception of the entire phenomenal 
content of Dasein’s basic existential constitution in the ultimate founda- 
tions of its own ontological intelligibility. Temporality gets experienced in a 
phenomenally primordial way in Dasein’s authentic Being-a-whole, in the phenom- 
enon of anticipatory resoluteness. If temporality makes itself known primordi- 
ally in this, then we may suppose that the temporality of anticipatory 
resoluteness is a distinctive mode of temporality. Temporality has different 
possibilities and different ways of temporalizing itself.* The basic possibilities 


1 ‘Sein “Bestand” gründet nicht in der Substanzialitat einer Substanz, sondern in der 
““Selbstandigkeit” des existierenden Selbst, dessen Sein als Sorge begriffen wurde.’ 

In this sentence Heidegger has used no less than five words derived from the Indo- 
European base ‘sta-’ (Cf. English ‘stand’, Latin ‘stare’, German ‘stehen’): ‘Bestand’, 
‘Substanz’, ‘Substantialitat’, ‘Selbstandigkeit’, ‘existierenden’. In each case we have used 
an English equivalent derived from the same base. 

The important word ‘Bestand’, which we have here translated somewhat arbitrarily 
as ‘subsistence’, and have often handled elsewhere in other ways, correspords to the verb 
‘bestehen’ (‘to subsist’, ‘to remain’, ‘to consist in’, even ‘to exist’ in a broader sense than 
Heidegger’s). It thus may stand for ‘subsistence’ in the broadest sense, or more particularly 
for ‘continued subsistence’; and it may also stand for that of which something ‘consists’ — 
its ‘content’, the whole ‘stock’ of things of which it consists. This is the sense in which 
Heidegger most frequently uses it, especially in such phrases as ‘der phanomenale Best- 
and’ (‘the phenomenal content’, ‘the stock of phenomena’). 

We have also somewhat arbitrarily translated ‘Selbständigkeit’ as ‘Self-subsistence’, in 
accordance with our translation of the adjective ‘selbstandig’ on H. 291-292. But as we 
shall see later (H. 322), ‘Self-constancy’ would perhaps be more appropriate. 


2 ‘Zeitlichkeit kann sich in verschiedenen Möglichkeiten und in verschiedener Weise : 


zeitigen.’ In ordinary German the verb ‘zeitigen’ means ‘to bring about’ or more strictiy, 
*to bring to maturity’; this is how we have translated it in the earlier portions of this work. 
In the present section, however, and in those which follow, Heidegger is exploiting the 
etymological connection of ‘zeitigen’ with such words as ‘Zei? (‘time’) and “Zeitlichkeiv 
(‘temporality’); we have accordingly ventured to translate it as ‘to tempnralize.’ We have 


304 


352 Being and Time II. 


of existence, the authenticity and inauthenticity of Dasein, are grounde 
ontologically on possible temporalizations of temporality. 

If the ascendancy of the falling understanding of Being (of Being : 
presence-at-hand)! keeps Dasein far from the ontological character | 
its own Being, it keeps it still farther from the primordial foundations | 
that Being. So one must not be surprised if, at first glance, temporali 
does not correspond to that which is accessible to the ordinary unde 
standing as ‘time’. Thus neither the way time is concejved in our ordinaı 
experience of it, nor the problematic which arises from this experienc 
can function without examination as a criterion for the appropriatene 
of an Interpretation of time. Rather, we must, in our investigation, mal 
ourselves familiar beforehand with the primordial phenomenon of tempo 
ality, so that in terms of this we may cast light on the necessity, the sourc 
and the reason for the dominion of the way it is ordinarily understoo: 

The primordial phenomenon of temporality will be held secure I 
demonstrating that if we have regard for the possible totality, unity, ar 
development of those fundamental structures of Dasein which we ha 
hitherto exhibited, these structures are all to be conceived as at botto: 
‘temporal’ and as modes of the temporalizing of temporality. Thus, whe 
temporality has been laid bare, there arises for the existential analyt 
the task of repeating our analysis of Dasein in the sense of Interpreting i 
essential structures with regard to their temporality. The basic directio! 
of the analyses thus required are prescribed by temporality itself. Accor: 
ingly the chapter will be divided as follows: anticipatory resuluteness : 
the way in which Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being-a-whole has existenti 
authenticity? (Section 62); the hermeneutical Situation at which we ha‘ 
arrived for Interpretin meaning of the Being of care, and the metho: 
ological character of the existential analytic in general (Section 63); ca 
and Selfhood (Section 64); temporality as the ontological meaning of ca 

305 Section 65); Dasein’s temporality and the tasks arising therefrom 
repeating the existential analysis in a primordial manner (Section 66). 


{| 62. Anticipatory Resoluteness as the Way tn which Dasein’s Potentiality-fc 
Being-a-whole has Existentiell Authenticity 

When resoluteness has been ‘thought through to the end’ in a wi 
corresponding to its ownmost tendency of Being, to what extent does 


already called attention to earlier passages (H. 122, 178) where ‘zeitigen’ has be 
changed to ‘zeigen’ in the later editions. If these changes are not simple misprints, they m 
indicate a deliberate intention to avoid the use of this verb in any sense but the spec 
one here introduced. (Contrast H. 152, where no such correction has been made.) 

2‘... (Sein als Vorhandenheit) . . .’ The ‘als’ of the later editions replaces an equali! 
sign which we find in the earlier editions. 

è ‘Das existenziell eigentliche Ganzseinkönnen des Daseins als vorlaufende Ents 
lossenheit. i 


II. 3 Being and Time 353 
lead us to authentic Being-towards-death? How are we to conceive the 
connection between wanting to have a conscience and Dasein’s existenti- 
ally projected, authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole? Does welding 
these two together yield a mew phenomenon? Or are we left with the 
resoluteness which is attested in its existentiell possibility, and can this 
resoluteness undergo an existentiell modalization through Being-towards- 
death ? What does it mean ‘to think through to the end’ existentially the 
phenomenon of resoluteness ? 

We have characterized resoluteness as a way of reticently projecting 
oneself upon one’s ownmost st Being-quilty, and exacting anxiety of oneself. 3 
Being-guilty belongs to o Dasein’s Being, and signifies the null Being-th 
basis of a nu nüllity. The ‘Guilty! which b belongs to the Being of Dasein is is 
something that that can be neither augmented nor d nor diminished. It comes before 
any quantification, if the latter has any meaning at all. Moreover, Dasein 
is essentially guilty—not | Just guilty on some occasions, and on other occastons 
not. Wanting to-have-s-conscience resol resolves” upon this eing-gui ty. To 


o= elo ae 


its potentiality-for-Being, and discloses it ‘right to its end’. Existentially, 
however, Dasein’s ““ - = ı -the- 

Being-towards-the-end which ‘understands—=that is-t0-say;-as anticipation o of 
death—resoluteneéss becomes authentically what it can be. Resoluteness 
does not just ust ‘have’ a a connection with anticipation, | as with something 


eee ee 


other than itself. It harbours in bours in itself authentic Being-towards-death, a as the 
possible existentiell Modality of its 0 own 1 authenticity, This ‘connection’ 1 must be 
elucidated phenomenally. 

By ‘‘resoluteness” we mean “‘letting onself be called forth to one’s 
ownmost Being-guilty”. Being-guilty belongs to the Being of Dasein itse itself, 
and we have determined that this is primarily a potentiality Tork; y a potentiality-for-Being. 
To: say that Dasein ‘is’ constantly guilty can only mean that in every case 
Dasein maintains itseif in this Being and does so as either authentic or 
inauthentic existing. Bemng-guilty is not just an abiding property of some- 
thing constantly present-at-hand, but the existentiell possibility of being 
authentically or inauthentically guüty. In every case, the ‘guilty’ is only 
rn es current factical potentiality-for-Being. Thus because Being-guilty 


belc Being of Dasein, it must be conceived as a potentiality-for- 
Being. Resten pe itself upon this potentiality-for-Being 


367 


254 Being and Time II. 3 
— that is to say, it understands itself in it. This understanding maintains 
„ itself, therefore, in a primordial possibility of Dasein. It maintains itself 
authentically in it if the resoluteness is primordially that which it tends to be. 
But we have revealed that Dasein’s primordial Being towards its potent- 
iality-for-Being is Being-towards-death—that is to say, towards that dis- 
tinctive possibility of Dasein which we have already characterized. 
Anticipation discloses this possibility as possibility. Thus only as anticipating 
does resoluteness become a primordial Being towards Dasein’s ownmost 
potentiality-for-Being. Only when it ‘qualifies’ itself as Being-towards- 
death does resoluteness understand the ‘can’ of its potentiality-for-Being 
guilty.! 
/ When Dasein is resolute, it takes over authentically in its existence the 
fact that it is the null basis of its own nullity. We have conceived death 
\existentially as what we have characterized as the possibility of the im- 
ssibility of existence—that is to say, as the utter nullity of Dasein. 
eath is not “added on” to Dasein at its ‘end’; but Dasein, as care, is the 
thrown (that is, null) basis for its death. The nullity by which Dasein’s 
Being is dominated primordially through and through, 1s revealed ta 
Dasein itself in authentic Being-towards-death. Only on the basis of 
Dasein’s zu role Being does anticipation make Being-guilty manifest. Care ` 
harbours in itself both death and guilt equiprimordially. Only anticipa- 
tory resoluieness understands the potentiality-for-Being-guilty authentically 
nd wholiv»—that is to say, primordialiy.il 
/ When the call of conscience is understood, lostness in the “they” is 
‘revealed. Resoluteness brings Dasein back to its ownmost potentiality- 
for-Being-its-Self. When one has an understanding Being-towards-death 
| towards death as one’s ownmost possibility—one’s potentiality-for-Being 
{becomes authentic and wholly transparent. 

The call of conscience passes over in its appeal all Dasein’s ‘worldly’ 
prestige and potentialities. Relentlessly it individualizes Dasein down to 
its potentiality-for-Being-guilty, and exagts of it that it should be this’ 
potentiality authentically. The unwave Als precision with which Dasein 
is thus essentially individualized down to its ownmost potentiality-for- 
eing, discloses the anticipation of [zum] death as the possibility which 
is non-relational. Anticipatory resoluteness lets the potentiality-for-Being- 
ilty, as one’s ownmost non-relational possibility, be struck wholly into 
he conscience. | N 

Any factical Dasein has been determined by its ownmost Being-guilty 
both before any factical indebtedness has been incurred and after any sich 


l ‘Das “kann” des Schuldigseinkönnens versteht‘ ‘dic Entschlossenheit erst, wenn sie. 
sich als Sein zum Tode “qualifiziert”.’ 


IT. 3 Being and Time 355 


indebtedness has been paid off; and wanting-to-have-a-conscience 
signifies that one is ready for the appeal to this ownmost Being-guilty. 
This prior Being-guilty, which is constantly with us, does not show itself 
unconcealedly in its character as prior until this very priority has been 
enlisted in [hineingestellt] that possibility which is simply not to be out- 
stripped. When, in anticipation, resoluteness has caught up [eingeholt] the 
ssibility of death into its potentiality-for-Being, Dasein’s authentic 
Fritence can no longer be outstripped [überholt] by anything. ~~ ~~ 
“The phenomenon of resoluteness has brought us before the primordial 
truth of existence. As resolute, Dasein is revealed to itself in its current 
factical potentiality-for-Being, and in such a way that Dasein itself is 
this revealing and Being-revealed. To any truth, there belongs a corre- 
sponding holding-for-true. The explicit appropriating of what has been 
disclosed or discovered is Being-certain. The primordial truth of existence 
demands an equiprimordial Being-certain, in which one maintains oneself 
in what resoluteness discloses. It! gives itself the current factical Situation, 
and brings itself into that Situation. The Situation cannot be calculated in 
advance or presented like something present-at-hand which is waiting 
for someone to grasp it. It merely gets disclosed in a free resolving which 
has rot been determined beforehand but is open to the possibility of such 
determination. What, then, does the certainty which belongs to such resoluteness 
signify? Such certainty must maintain itself in what is disclosed by the 
resolution. But this means that it simply cannot become rigid as regards the 
Situation, but must understand that the resolution, in accordance with its 
own meaning as a disclosure, must be held open and free tor the current 
factical possibility. The certainty of the resolution signifies that one helds 
oneself free for the possibility of taking it back—a possibility which is facti- 
cally necessary.” However, such holding-for-true in resoluteness (as the 
truth of existence) by no means Jets us fall back into irresoluteness. On the 
contrary, this holding-for-true, as a resolute holding-oneself-free for taking 
back, is authentic resoluteness which resolves to keep repeating itself.” Thus, id 


1 Heidegger’s ambiguous pronoun refers to ‘resoluteness’, as is clear from H. 326 
below. 

2 'Die Gewissheit des Entschlusses bedeutet: Sichfreihalten für seine mögliche und je 
faktisch notwendige Zurücknahme.' It is not grammatically clear whether the | Dea ae 
adjective ‘seine’ refers back to ‘Entschlusses’ (‘resolution’) or to the ‘Sich- of ‘Stchfreihalten’ 
‚(‘oneself”}. We have chosen the former interpretation as somewhat more natural. But it is 
.tempting to construe this and the following sentence as preparing the way for Heidegger’s 
remark a few lines below that ‘In seinem Tod muss sich das Dasein schlechthin ‘‘zuriick- 
nehmen” — which might be translated as ‘In its death, Dasein must ‘withdraw’ itself 
utterly.” In that case it would be attractive to translate the present sentence by writing 
*. .. holds oneself free for one’s own withdrawal...’ 

8‘, . . eigentliche Entschlossenheit zur Wiederholung ihrer selbst.’ The idea seems to be that 
authentic resoluteness keeps reiterating itself in the face of a constant awareness that it 
may have to be retracted or taken back at any time. 


309 


356 Being and Time Il. 3 


an existentiell manner, one’s very lostness in irresoluteness gets under- 
mined. The holding-for-true which belongs to resoluteness, tends, in 
accordance with its meaning, to hold itself free constantly—that is, to hold 
itself free for Dasein’s whole potentiality-for-Being. This constant certainty 
is guaranteed to resoluteness only so that it will relate itself to that pos- 
sibility of which it can be utterly certain. In its death, Dasein must simply 
‘take back’ e 


in other words si ce it anticipates it—resoluteness thus attains a certainty 


which is authe l 
ut Dasein is equiprimordially in the untruth. Anticipatory resoluteness 


gives Dasein at the same time the primordial certainty that it has been 
closed off. In anticipatory resoluteness, Dasein halds itself open for its 


constant t lostness in the irresoluteness of the “‘they”—a lostness "which is 
an Sane: As a constant possibility of 
Dasein, irresoluteness is co-certatn. When resoluteness is transparent to 
itself, it understands that the indefintieness of one’s potentiality-for-Being is 
made definite only in a resolution as regards the current Situation. It 
knows about the indefiniteness by which an entity that exists is dominated 
through and through. But if this knowing is to correspond to authentic 
resoluteness, it must itself arise from an authentic disclosure. The in- 
definiteness of one’s own potentiality-for-Being, even when this potentiality 
has become certain in a resolution, is first made wholly manifest in Being- 
towards-death. Anticipation brings Dasein face to face with a possibility 
which is constantly certain but which at any moment remai ute 
as fo ~when at possi ill become an impossibility. Anticipation 
ifest | has been thrown into the indefiniteness 


of its ‘limit-Situation’; when resolved upon the latter in gains its 
authentic ” potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. The indefiniteness_of death is 


primordially. disclosed_in anxiety. But this primordial anxiety strives to 
exact resoluteness of itself. It moves out of the way everything which 
conceals the fact that Dasein has been abandoned to itself. The “nothing” 
with which anxiety brings us face to face, unveils the nullity by which 
Dasein, in its very basis, is defined; and this basis itself i s as thrownness 
into death. 

Our analysis has revealed seriatim those items of modalization towards 
which resoluteness tends of itself and which arise from authentic Being 
towards death as that possibility which is one’s ownmost, non-relational, 
not to be outstripped, certain, and yet indefinite. Resoluteness is authentic- 
ally and wholly what it can be, only as anticipatory resoluteness. 

But on the other hand, in our Interpretation of the ‘connection’ 
between resoluteness and anticipation, we have first reached a full 


II. 3 Being and Time 957 
existential understanding of anticipation itself. Hitherto this could amount 
to no more than an ontological projection. We have now shown that 
anticipation is not just a fictitious possibility which we have forced upon 
Dasein; it is a mode of an existentiell potentiality-for-Being that is attested 
in Dasein-—a mode which Dasein exacts of itself, if indeed it authentically 
understands itself as resolute. Anticipation ‘is’ not some kind of free- 
floating behaviour, but must be conceived as the possibility of the authenticity 
of that resoluteness which has been attested in an existentiell way—a possibility 
hidden in such resoluteness, and thus attested therewith. Authentic ‘thinking about 


death’ is a wanting-to- -a-conscience, which has become transparent 
to itself ın an existentiell manner. If reso If resoluteness, as authentic, ten tends to- 


wares the e deli s the made delimited by anticipation, a and lif a LT to 
authentic ne -for-Being-a-whole, then in the 


nn which is attested ın an ee manner, there is attested 
with it an authentic_potentiality-for-Being-a-whole which belongs to 
Dasein. The question of the potentiality-for-Being-a-whole is one which is factical 
and existentiell. It is answered by Dasein as resolute. The question of Dasein’s 
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole has now fully sloughed off the character 
indicated at the beginning, !!! when we treated it as it if were just a theo- 
retical or methodological question of the analytic of Dasein, arising from 
the endeavour to have the whole of Dasein completely ‘given’. The ques- 
tion of Dasein’s totality, which at the beginning we discussed only with 
regard to ontological method, has its justification, but only because the 
ground for that justification goes back to an ontical possibility of Dasein. 
By thus casting light upon the ‘connection’ between anticipation and 
resoluteness in the sense of the possible modalization of the latter by the 
former, we have exhibited as a phenomenon an authentic potentiality- 
for-Being-a-whole which belongs to Dasein. If with this phenomenon we 
have reached a way of Being of Dasein in which it brings itself to itself 
and face to face with itself, then this phenomenon must, both ontically 
and ontologically, remain unintelligible to the everyday common-sense 
manner in which Daseın has been interpreted by the “they”. It would be 
a misunderstanding to shove this existentiell possibility aside as ‘un- 
proved’ or to want to ‘prove’ it theoretically. Yet the phenomenon needs 
to be protected against the grossest perversions. 
"Anticipatory re oE escape, a ore the 
‘overcoming’ of death; it is rather that understanding which follows the 
call of conscience and cience and Which frees for- death the ) possibility of acquiring 
power over Dasein’s existence and-of basically dispersing all fugit fugitive Self- 
i concealments. Nor does wanting-to-have-a-conscience, which has been 
made determinate as Being-towards-death, signify a kind of seclusion in 


310 


SII 


358 Being and Time IT. 3: 


i which one flees the world; rather, it brings one without Illusions into the 
` resoluteness of ‘taking action’. Neither does anticipatory resoluteness stem 


| 
| 


from ‘idealistic’ exactions soaring above existence and its possibilities; it, 
springs from a sober understanding of what are factically the basic pos- 


| sibilities for Dasein. Along with the sober anxiety which brings us face to 


face with our individualized potentiality-for-Being, there goes an un- 
shakable joy in this possibility. In it Dasein becomes free from the enter- _ 
taining ‘incidentals’ with which busy curiosity keeps providing itself— 
primarily from the events of the world.! But the analysis of these basic 
moods would transgress the limits which we have drawn for the present 
Interpretation by aiming towards fundamental ontology. 

Is there not, however, a definite ontical way of taking authentic 
existence, a factical ideal of Dasein, underlying our ontological Interpre- 
tation of Dasein’s existence? That is so indeed. But not only is this Fact 
one which must not be denied and which we are forced to grant; it must 
also be conceived in its positive necessity, in terms of the object which we 
have taken as the theme of our investigation. Philosophy will never seek 
to deny its ‘presuppositions’, but neither may it simply admit them. It 
conceives them, and it unfolds with morc and more penetration both the 
presuppositions themselves and that for which they are presuppositions. 
The methodological considerations now demanded of us will have this 
very function. 


163. The Hermeneutical Situation at which we have Arrived for Interpreting the 
Meaning of the Being of Care; and the Methodological Character of the Existential 
Analytic in General? ` 

In its anticipatory resoluteness, Dasein has now been made phenomen- 
ally visible with regard to its possible authenticity and totality. The 
hermeneutical Situation!” which was previously inadequate for interpret- 
ing the meaning of the Being of care, now has the required primordiality.. 
Dasein has been put into that which we have in advance, and this has 
been done primordially—that is to say, this has been done with regard to 
its authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole; the idea of existence, which 
guides us as that which we see in advance, has been made definite by the 
clarification of our ownmost potentiality-for-Being; and, now that we 
have concretely worked out the structure of Dasein’s Being, its peculiar 
ontological character has become so plain as compared with everything 
present-at-hand, that Dasein’s existentiality has been grasped in advance 


1 ‘In ihr wird das Dasein frei von den “Zufalligkeiten" des Unterhaltenwerdens die 


sich die geschäfti ige Neugier primär aus den Weltbegebenheiten verschafft.’ 
8 ‘Die für eine Interpretation des Seinssinnes der Sorge gewonnene hermeneutische Situation und 
der methodische Charakter der existenzialen Analytik überhaupt.’ 


te 


Il. 3 Being and Time 359 
with sufficient Articulation to give sure guidance tor working out the 
existentialia conceptually. | 

The way which we have so far pursued in the analytic of Dasein has 
led us to a concrete demonstration of the thesis’ which was put forward 
just casually at the beginning—that the enitty which in every case we ourselves 
are, 7: ontologically that which is farthest. The reason for this lies in care itself. 
Our Being alongside the things with which we concern ourselves most 
closely in the ‘world’—a Being which is falling—guides the everyday way 
in which Dasein is interpreted, and covers up ontically Dasein’s authentic 
Being, so that the ontology which is directed towards this entity is denied 
an appropriate basis. Therefore the primordial way in which this entity 
is presented as a phenomenon is anything but obvious, if even ontology 
proximally follows the course of the everyday interpretation of Dasein. 
The laying-bare of Dasein’s primordial Being must rather be wrested 
from Dasein by following the opposite course from that taken by the falling 
ontico-ontological tendency of interpretation. 

Not only in exhibiting the most elemental structures of Being-in-the- 
world, in delimiting the concept of the world, in clarifying the average 
“who” of this entity (the “who” which is closest to us—the they-self), in 
Interpreting the ‘there’, but also, above all, in analysing care, death, 
conscience, and guilt—in all these ways we have shown how in Dasein 
itself concernful common sense has taken control of Dasein’s potentiality- 
for-Being and the disclosure of that potentiality—that is to say, the closing 
of it off. 

Dasein’s kind of Being thus demands that any ontological Interpretation 
which sets itself the goal of exhibiting the phenomena in their primordi- 


ality, should capture the Being of this entity, in spite of this entity's own tendency to : 


cover things up. Existential analysis, therefore, constantly has the character 
of doing violence [Gewaltsamkeit], whether to the claims of the everyday 
interpretation, or to its complacency and its tranquillized obviousness. 
While indeed $his characteristic is specially distinctive of the ontology of 
Dasein, it belongs properly to any Interpretation, because the under- 
standing which develops in Interpretation has the structure of a projection. 
But is not anything of this sort guided and regulated in a way of its own? 
Where are ontological projects to get the evidence that their ‘findings’ 
are phenomenally appropriate? Ontological Interpretation projects the 
‚entity presented to it upon the Being which is that entity’s own, so as to 
conceptualize it with regard to its structure. Where are the signposts to 
direct fhe projection, so that Being will be reached at all? And what it 
the entity which becomes the theme of the existential analytic, hides the 
Being that belongs to it, and does so in its very way of being? To answer 


312 


313 


360 Being and Tims II. 3 


these questions we must first restrict ourselves to clarifying the analytic of 
Dasein, as the questions themselves demand. 

The interpretation of the Self belongs to Dasein’s Being. In the circum- 
spective-concernful discovering of the ‘world’, concern gets sighted too. 
Dasein always understands itself factically in definite existentiell possibil- 
ities, even if its projects stem only from the common sense of the “they”. 
Whether explicitly or not, whether appropriately or not, existence is 
somehow understood too. There are some things which every ontical 
understanding ‘includes’, even if these are only pre-ontological—that is to 
say, not conceived theoretically or thematically. Every ontologically 
explicit question about Dasein’s Being has had the way already prepared 
for it by the kind of Being which Dasein has. 

Yet where are we to find out what makes up the ‘authentic’ existencé 
of Dasein? Unless we have an existentiell understanding, all analysis of 
existentiality will remain groundless, Is it not the case that underlying our 
Interpretation of the authenticity and totality of Dasein, there is an 
ontical way of taking existence which may be possible but need not be 
binding for everyone? Existential Interpretation will never seek to take 
over any authoritarian pronouncement as to those things which, from an 
existentiell point of view, are possible or binding. But must it not justify 
itself in regard to those existentiell possibilities with which it gives onto- 
logical Interpretation its ontical basis? If the Being of Dasein is essentially 
potentiality-for-Being, if it is Being-free for its ownmost possibilities, and 
if, in every case, it exists only in freedom for these possibilities or in lack 
of freedom for them, can ontological Interpretation do anything else than 
base itself on ontical possibilities—ways of potentiality-for-Being—and 
project these possibilities upon their ontological possibility? And if, for the 
most part, Dasein interprets itself in terms of its lostness in concerning 
itself with the ‘world’, does not the appropriate way of disclosure for such 
an entity lie in determining the ontico-existentiell possibilities (and doing 
so in the manner which we have achieved by following the opposite 
course) and then providing an existential analysis grounded upon these 
possibilities ? In that case, will not the violence of this projection amount to freeing 
Dasein’s undisguised phenomenal content? 

It may be that our method demands this ‘violent’ presentation of 
possibilities of existence, but can such a presentation be taken out of the 
province of our free discretion? If the analyic makes anticipatory resolute- 
ness basic as a potentiality-for-Being which, in an existentiell manner, is 
authentic—a possibility to which Dasein itself summons us from the very 
basis of its existence—then is this possibility just one which is left to our 
discretion? Has that way-of-Being in accordance with which Dasein’s 


11.3 Being and Time 961 
potentiality-for-Being comports itself towards its distinctive possibility— 
death—been just accidentally pounced upon? Does Being-in-the-worla 
have a higher instance for its potentiality-for-Being than its own death?! 

Even if the ontico-ontological projection of Dasein upon an authentic 
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole may not be just something that is left to 
our discretion, does this already justify the existential Interpretation we 
have given for this phenomenon? Where does this Interpretation get its 
clue, if not from an idea of existence in general which has been ‘pre- 
supposed’ ? How have the steps in the analysis of inauthentic everydayness 
been regulated, if not by the concept of existence which we have posited ? 
And if we say that Dasein ‘falls’, and that therefore the authenticity of its 
potentiality-for-Being must be wrested from Dasein in spite of this tend- 
ency of its Being,® from what point ofview is this spoken ? Is not everything 
already illumined by the light of the ‘presupposed’ idea of existence, even 
if rather dimly? Where does this idea get its justification? Has our initial 
projection, in which we called attention to it, led us nowhere? By no 
means. 

In indicating the formal aspects of the idea of existence we have been 
guided by the understanding-of-Being which lies in Dasein itseif. Without 
any ontological transparency, it has nevertheless been revealed that in 
every case I am myself the entity which we call Dasein, and that I am so 
as a potentiality-for-Being for which to be this entity is an issue. Dasein 
understands itself as Being-in-the-world, even if it does so without 
adequate ontological definiteness. Being thus, it encounters entities which 
have the kind of Being of what is ready-to-hand and present-at-hand. No 
matter how far removed from an ontological concept the distinction 
between existence and Reality may be, no matter even if Dasein proxim- 
ally understands existence as Reality, Dasein is not just present-at-hand 
but has already understood itself, however mythical or magical the inter- 
pretation which it gives may be. For otherwise, Dasein would never ‘live’ 
in a myth and would not be concerned with magic in ritual and cult. 
The idea of existence which we have posited gives us an outline of the 
formal structure of the understanding of Dasein and does so in a way 
which is not binding from an existentiell point of view. 

Under the guidance of this idea the preparatory analysis of the everyday- 
ness that lies closest to us has been carried out as far as the first conceptual 


1 ‘Hat das In-der-Welt-sein eins höhere Instanz seines Seinkönnens als seinen Tod?” 

2°... und deshalb sei ihm die Eigentlichkeit des Seinkönnens gegen diese Seinstendenz 
abzuringen . ” This of course does not mean that this authenticity is to be taken away 
from Dasein; it means that because such authenticity runs counter to Dasein’s tendency 
to fall, Dasein must make a very real effort to achieve it, or perhaps rather that our 
Interpretation calls for a similar effort if this authenticity is to be properly discerned. 


314 


315 


eo. 
r 


362 Being and Time II. 3 


definition of “care”. This latter phenormenon has enabled us to get a more 
precise grasp of existence and of its relations to facticity and falling. 
And defining the structure of care has given us a basis on which to dis- 
tinguish onvclogically between existence and Reality for the first time.” 
This has led us to the thesis that the substance of man is existence.¥44 

Yet even in this formal idea of existence, which is not binding upon us 
in an existentiell way, there already lurks a definite though unpretentious 
ontological ‘content’, which—like the idea of Reality, which has been 
distinguished from this—‘presupposes’ an idea of Being in general. Only 
within the horizon of thts idea of Being can the distinction between exist- 
ence and Reality be accomplished. Surely, in both of them what we have 
in view is Being. 

But if we are to obtain an ontologically clarified idea of Being in 
general, must we not do so by first working out that understanding-of- 
Being which belongs to Dasein? This understanding, however, is to be 
grasped primordially only on the basis of a primordial Interpretation of 
Dasein, in which we take the idea of existence as our clue. Does it not 
then become altogether patent in the end that this problem of fundamental 
ontology which we have broached, is one which moves in a ‘circle’? 

We have indeed already shown, in analysing the structure of under- 
standing in general, that what gets censured inappropriately as a ‘circle’, 
belongs to the essence and to the distinctive character of understanding 
as such. In spite of this, if the problematic of fundamental ontology is 
to have its hermeneutical Situation clarified, our investigation must now 
come back explicitly to this ‘circular argument’. When it is objected that 
the existential Interpretation is ‘circular’, it is said that we have ‘pre- 
supposed’ the idea of existence and of Being in general, and that Dasein 
gets Interpreted ‘accordingly’, so that the idea of Being may be obtained 
from it. But what does ‘presupposition’ signify? In positing the idea of 
existence, do we also posit some proposition from which we deduce 
further propositions about the Being of Dasein, in accordance with formal 
rules of consistency ? Or does this pre-supposing have the character of an 
understanding projection, in such a manner indeed that the Interpretation 
by which such an understanding gets developed, will let that which is to 
be interpreted put itself into words for the very first time, so that it may decide 
of its oum accord whether, as the entity which it is, it has that state of Being for 
which it has been disclosed in the projection with regard to its formal aspects?» Is 


1 ‘Oder hat dieses Voraus-setzen den Charakter des verstehenden Entwerfens, so zwar, 
dass die solches Verstehen ausbildende Interpretation das Auszulegende gerada erst selbst 
zu Wort kommen lässt, damit es von sich aus entscheide, ob es als dieses Seiends die Seinsverfassung 
hergibt, auf welche es im Entwurf formalanzeigend erschlossen wurde ? Here, however, Heidegger 
may be using the verb ‘erschliessen’ in the sense of ‘infer’, in spite of his remarks on H. 75 
above (see our note 1, p. 105 ad loc.) and ‘Entwurf’ in the sense of ‘sketch’. 


IL. 3 Being and Time 363 
there any other way at all by which an entity can put itself into words 
with regard to its Being? We cannot ever ‘avoid’ a ‘circular’ proof in the 
existential analytic, because such an analytic does not do any proving at 
all by the rules of the ‘logic of consistency’. What common sense wishes 
to eliminate in avoiding the ‘circle’, on the supposition that it is measuring 
up to the loftiest rigour of scientific investigation, is nothing less than the 
basic structure of care. Because it is primordially constituted by care, any 
Dasein is already ahead of itself. As being, it has in every case already 
projected itself upon definite possibilities of its existence; and in such 
existentiell projections it has, in a pre-ontological manner, also projected 
something like existence and Being. Like all research, the research which 
wants to develop and conceptualize that kind of Being which belongs to 
existence, ts ttself a kind of Being which disclosive Dasein possesses; can such 
research be denied this projecting which is essential to Dasein ? 

Yet the ‘charge of circularity’ itself comes from a kind of Being which 
belongs to Dasein. Something like a projection, even an ontological one, 
still remains for the common sense of our concernful absorption in the 
“they”; but it necessarily seems strange to us, because common sense barri- 
cades itself against it ‘on principle’. Common sense concerns itself, whether 
‘theoretically’ or ‘practically’, only with entities which can be surveyed 
at a glance circumspectively. What is*distinctive in common sense is that 
it has in view only the experiencing of ‘factual’ entities, in order that it 
may be able to rid itself of an understanding of Being. It fails to recognize 
that entities can be experienced ‘factually’ only when Being is already 
understood, even if it has not .been conceptualized. Common sense mis- 
understands understanding. And therefore common sense must necessarily 
pass off as ‘violent’ anything that lies beyond the reach of its understanding, 
or any attempt to go out so far. 

When one talks of the ‘circle’ in understanding, one expresses a failure 
to recognize two things: (1) that understanding as such makes up a basic 
kind of Dasein’s Being, and (2) that this Being is constituted as care. To 
deny the circle, to make a secret of it, or even to want to overcome it, 
means finally to reinforce this failure. We must rather endeavour to leap 
into the ‘circle’, primordially and wholly, so that even at the start of the 
analysis of Dasein we make sure that we have a full view of Dasein’s 
circular Being. If, in the ontology of Dasein, we ‘take our departure’ 
from a worldless “I” in order to provide this “I” with an Object and an 
ontologically baseless relation to that Object, then we have ‘presupposed’ 
not too much, but 100 little. If we make a problem of ‘life’, anu then just 
occasionally have regard for death too, our view is too short-sighted. The object 
we have taken as our theme is artificially and dogmatically curtailed if ‘in the 


316 


317 


364. Being and Time II. 3 
first instance’ we restrict ourselves to a ‘theoretical subject’, in order 
that we may then round it out ‘on the practical side’ by tacking on an 
‘ethic’. 

This may suffice to clarify the existential meaning of the hermeneutical 
Situation of a primordial analytic of Dasein. By exhibiting anticipatory 
resoluteness, we have brought Dasein before us with regard to its authentic 
totality, so that we now have it in advance. The authenticity of the 
potentiality-for-Being-one’s-Self guarantees that primordial existentiality 
is something we see in advance, and this assures us that we are coining 
the appropriate existential concepts.? 

At the same time our analysis of anticipatory resoluteness has led us to 
the phenomenon of primordial and authentic truth. We have shown earlier 
how that understanding-of-Being which prevails proximally and for the 
most part, conceives Being in the sense of presence-at-hand, and so covers 
up the primordial phenomenon of truth. If, however, ‘there is’ Being 
only in so far as truth ‘is’, and if the understanding of Being varies accord- 
ing to the kind of truth, then truth which is primordia! and authentic 
must guarantee the understanding of the Being of Dasein and of Being 
in general. The ontological ‘truth’ of the existential analysis is developed 
on the ground of the primordial existentiell truth. However, the latter 
does not necessarily need the former. The most primordial and basic 
existential truth, for which the problematic of fundamental ontology 
strives in preparing for the question of Being in’general, is the disclosedness 
of the meaning of the Being of care. In order to lay bare this meaning, 
we need to hold in readiness, undiminished, the full structural content of 
care. 


T 64. Care and Selfhood 


Through the unity of the items which are constitutive for care— 
existentiality, facticity, and fallenness—it has become possible to give the 
first ontological definition for the totality of Dasein’s structural whole. 
We have given an existential formula for the structure of care as “‘ahead- 
of-itsel{—Being-already-in (a world) as Being-alongside (entities encoun- 
tered within-the-world)”. 3 We have seen that the care-structure does not 
first arise from a coupling together, but is articulated all the same.* In 
assessing this ontological result, we have had to estimate how well it 


1 ‘Die Eigentlichkeit des Selbatseinkönnens verbürgt die Vor-sicht auf die urs nich 

Existenzialität, und diese sichert die Prägung der angemessenen existenzialen 

keit.’ The ambiguity of our ‘this’ reflects a similar ambiguity in Heidegger’s diese’ ; 

which may refer either to ‘die Vor-sicht’ or to ‘die urs rüngliche Existenzialitat’. | 
3 ‘Sich-vorweg—schon-sein-in (einer Welt) als Sein-bei (innerweltlich begegnenden 

Seienden)’. Here we follow the earlier editions. In the later editions there is a hyphen 

instead of a dash between ‘vorweg’ and ‘schon’, 


II. 3 | Being and Time 365 
satisfies the requirements for a. „rimordial Interpretation of Dasein.*! The 
upshot of these considerations has been that neither the whole of Dasein 
nor its authentic potentiality-for-Being has ever been made a theme. The 
structure of care, however, seems to be precisely where the attempt to 
grasp the whole of Dasein asa phenomenon has foundered. The ‘‘ahead-of- 
itself” presented itself as a “‘not-yet’’. But when th “ahead-of-itself” which 
had been characterized as something still oıxstanding, was considered in 
genuinely existential manner, it revealed itself as Betng-towards-the-end— 
something which, in the dépths ofits Being, every Dasein is. We made it plain 
at thesame time that in the call of conscience care summons Dasein towards 
its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. When we came to understand in a prim- 
ordial manner how this appeal is understood, we saw that the understand- 
ing of it manifests itself as anticipatory resoluteness, which includes an 
authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole-—a potentiality of Dasein. Thus 
the care-structure does not speak against the possibility of Being-a-whole 
but is the condition for the possibility of such an existentiell potentiality-for- 
Being. In the course of these analyses, it became plain that the existential 
phenomena of death, conscience, and guilt are anchored in the pheno- 
menon of care. The totality of the structural whole has become even more richly 
articulated; and because of this, the existential question of the unity of this totality 
has become still more urgent. 

How are we to conceive this unity ? How can Dasein exist as a unity in 
the ways and possibilities of its Being which we have mentioned? Mani- 
festly, it can so exist only in such a way that it is siself this Being in its 
essential possibilities—that in each case / am this éntity. The ‘I’ seems to 
‘hold together’ the totality of the structural whole. In the ‘ontology’ of 
this entity, the ‘I’ and the ‘Self’ have been conceived from the earliest 
times as the supporting ground (as substance or subject). Even in its 
preparatory characterization of everydayness, our analytic has already 
come up against the question of Dasein’s “who”. It has been shown that 
proximally and for the most part Dasein is not itself but is lost in the they- 
self, which is an existe#tiell modification of the authentic Self. The 
question of the ontological constitution of Selfhood has remained un- 
answered. In principle, of course, we have already fixed upon a clue for 
this problem ;*!! for if the Self belongs to the essential [wesenhaften] attri- 
butes of Dasein, while Dasein’s ‘Essence’ {‘‘Essenz’’] lies in existence, then 
“I”-hood and Selfhood must be conceived extstentially. On the negative 
side, it has also been shown that our ontological characterization of the 
“they” prohibits us from making any use of categories of presence-at- 
hand (such as substance). It has become clear, in principle, that onto- 
logically care is not to be derived from Reality or to be built up with the 


318 


| vg 


319 


366 Being and Time H. 4 
categories of Reality.*!!! Care already harbours in itself the phenomenon 
of the Self, if indeed the thesis is correct that the expression ‘care for 
oneself” ["“Selbstsorge”], would be tautological if it were proposed in cop- 
formity with the term “solicitude” [Fürsorge] as care for Others.*!v But in 
that case the problem of defining ontologically the Selfhood of Dasein 
gets sharpened to the question of the existential ‘connection’ between care 
and Selfhood. 

To clarify the existentiality of the Self, we take as our ‘natural’ point of 
departure Dasein’s everyday interpretation of the Self. In saying “I”, 
Dasein expresses itself about ‘itself’. It is not necessary that in doing so 
Dasein should make any utterance, With the ‘P, this entity has itself in 
view. The content of this expressign is regarded as something utterly 
simple. In each case, it just stands for me and nothing further. Also, this 
T, as something simple, is not an attribute of other Things; it is not 
itself a predicate, but the absolute ‘subject’. What is expressed and what is 
addressed in saying “I”, is always met as the same persisting something. 
The characteristics of ‘simplicity’, ‘substantiality’, and ‘personality’, which 
Kant, for instance, made the basis for his doctrine ‘of the paralogisms of 
pure reason’,2” arise from a genuine pre-phenomenological experience. 
The question remains whether that which we have experienced ontically 
in this way may be Interpreted ontologically with the help of the ‘cate- 
gories’ mentioned. 

Kant, indeed, in strict conformity with the phenomenal content given in 
saying ‘“*I’’, shows that theontical thesesabout the soul-substance which have 
been inferred [erschlossenen] from these characteristics, are without justifi- 
cation. But in so doing, he mere!y rejects a wrong enttcal explanation of the 
“T’; he has by no means achieved an ontological Interpretation of Selfhood, 
nor has he even obtained some assurance of it and made positive preparation 
for it. Kant makes a more rigorous attempt than his predecessors to keep 
hold of the phenomenal content of saying “I”; yet even though in theory 
he has denied that the ontical foundations of the ontology of the substantial 
apply to the“ I”, he still slips back into this same inappropriate ontology. This 
will be shown more exactly, in order that we may establish what it means 
ontologically to take saying “I” as the starting-point for the analysis of 
Self hood. The Kantian analysis of the ‘I think’ is now to be adduced as an 
illustration, but only so far as is demanded for clarifying these problems.*¥! 

The ‘P is a bare consciousness, accompanying all concepts. In the 
‘I’, ‘nothing more is represented than a transcendental subject of 
thoughts’. ‘Consciousness in itself (is) not so much a representation . . . as 


‚it is a form of representation in general.’2vii The ‘I think’ is ‘the form of 


apperception, which clings to every experience and precedes it’.*vill 


II. 3 Being and Time 367. 


Kant grasps the phenomenal content of the ‘I’ correctly in the expres- 
sion ‘I think’, or—if one also pays heed to including the ‘practical person’ 
when one speaks of ‘intelligence’—in the expression ‘I take action’. In 
Kant’s sense we must take saying “I” as saying “I think”. Kant tries to 
establish the phenomenal content of the “I” as res cogitans. If in doing so 
he calls this “I” a ‘logical subject’, that does not mean that the “I” in 
general is a concept obtained merely by way of logic. The “I” is rather the 
subject of logical behaviour, of binding together. ‘I think’ means ‘I bind 
together’. All binding together is an ‘Z bind together’. In any taking- 
together or relating, the “I” always underlies—the troxetpevov. The 
subjectum is therefore ‘consciousness in itself’, not a representation but 
rather the ‘form’ of representation. That is to say, the “I think” is not 
something represented, but the formal structure of representing as such, 
and this formal structure alone makes it possible for anything to have 
been represented. When we speak of the “form” of representation, we 
have in view neither a framework nor a universal concept, but that which, 
as elöos, makes every representing and everything represented be 
what it is. If the “I” is understood as the form of representation, this 
amounts to saying that it is the ‘logical subject’. 

Kant’s analysis has two positive aspects. For one thing, he sees the 
impossibility of ontically reducing the “I” to a substance; for another 
thing, he holds fast to the “I” as ‘I think’. Nevertheless, he takes this “T” 
as subject again, and he does so in a sense which is ontologically inappro- 
priate. For the ontological concept of the subject characterizes not the Self- 
hood of the “I” qua Self, but the selfsameness and steadiness of something that 1s 
always present-at-hand. To define the “I” ontologically as “subject”’ means 
to regard it as something always present-at-hand. The Being of the “I” 
is understood as the Reality of the res cogitans.*!* 

But how does it come about that while the ‘I think’ gives Kant a 
genuine phenomenal starting-point, he cannot exploit it ontologically, and 
has to fall back on the ‘subject’ that is to say, something substantial? The 
“I” is not just an ‘I think’, but an ‘I think something’. And does not 
Kant himself keep on stressing that the “I” remains related to its repre- 
sentations, and would be nothing without them? 

For Kant, however, these representations are the ‘empirical’, which is 
‘accompanied’ by the “I”—the appearances to which the “I” ‘clings’. 
Kant nowhere shows the kind of Being of this ‘clinging’ and ‘accompany- 
ing’. At bottom, however, their kind of Being is understood as the constant 
Being-present-at-hand of the “I” along with its representations. Kant has 
indeed avoided cutting the “I” adrift from thinking; but he has done so 
without starting with the ‘I think’ itself in its full essential content as an 


320 


321 


368 Being and Time II. 3 


‘I think something’, and above all, without seeing what is ontologically 
‘presupposed’ in taking the ‘l think something’ as a basic characteristic 
[the Self. For even the ‘I think something’ is not definite enough onto- 
iogically as a starting-point, because the ‘something’ remains indefinite. 
ii ny this “something” we understand an entity within-the-world, then it 
ice tly implies that the world has been presupposed; and this very pheno- 
enon of the world co-determines the state of Being of the “I”, if indeed 
it is to be possible for the “F’ to be something like an ‘I think something’. 
lia saying “I”, I have in view the entity which in each case I am as an ‘I 
gt-in-a-world’. Kant did not see the phenomenon of the world, and was 
consistent enough to keep ‘the ‘representations’ apart from the a priori 
content of the ‘I think’. But as a consequence the “I” was again forced 
back to an isolated subject, accompanying representations in a way which 
is ontologically quite indefinite. 

In saying “I”, Dasein expresses itself as Being-in-the-world. But does saying 
“I” in the replay manner have itself in view as being-in-the-world 
jin-der-Welt-seiend] ? Here we must make a distinction. When saying 
“I”, Dasein surely has in view the entity which, in every case, it is itself, 
The everyday interpretation of the Self, however, has a tendency to 
understand itself in terms of the ‘world’ with which it is concerned. When 
Dasein has itself in view ontically, it fails to see itself in relation to the kind 
of Being of that entity which it is itself. And this holds especially for the 
basic state of Dasein, Being-in-the-world.**! 

What is the motive for this ‘fugitive’ wav of saying “T’’? It is motivated 
by Dasein’s falling; for as falling, it flees in the face of itself into the 
“they”’.t When the “I” talks in the ‘natura!’ manner, this iz performed by 
the they-self.2 What expresses itself in the ‘I’ is that Self which, proxim- 
ally and for the most part, I am not authentically. When one is absorbed 
in the everyday multiplicity and the rapid succcssion [Sich-jagen] of that 
with which one is concerned, the Self of the self-forgetful “I am concerned’ 
shows itself as something simple which is constantly selfsame but indefinite 
and empty. Yet one ts that with which one concerns oneself, In the 
‘natural’ ontical way in which the “T” talks, the phenomenal content cf 
the Dasein which one has in view in the “P’ gets overlooked; but this gives 
no justification for our joining in this overlooking of it, or for forcing upon the 
problematic of the Self an inappropriate ‘categorial’ horizon when we 
Interpret the “‘T’’ ontologically. 

Of course by thus refusing to follow the everyday way in which the “I” 


1 ‘Durch das Verfallen des Daseins, als welches es vor sich selbst flieht in das Man,’ 
The ‘es’ appears only in the later editions. 


2 Die “natürliche” Ich-Rede vollzieht das Man-selbst.’ 


Il. 3 Being and Time 369 
talks, our ontological Interpretation of the ‘I’ has by no means sclved the 
problem; but it has indeed prescribed the direction for any further inquiries. 
In the “I”, we have in view that entity which one is in ‘being-in-the- 
world’. 

Being-already-m-a-world, however, as Being-alsngside-the-ready-te- 
hand-witbin-the-wonid, means eguiprimordiaily hot one is ahead of 
oneself. With the ‘I’, what we have in view is that e tty “or which the 
wsue is the Being of the entity that it is. With the ‘IT’, « are ex presses itself, 
though proximally and for the most part in the ‘fugitive’ way in which 
the “P? talks whee tt concerrs itself with something, The tbev-seif keeps 


on saving US moot oady ast most frequently because at bovtom i ag aot 
j k er y = . i ` . ` - . 
authenheads itjent, atu ovades its authentic potentiality-for-Being. If the 


Fa 


ontologicat constitu cow of the Self is not to be traced back either to an 
“P-substance or to z ‘subject’, but if, on the contrary, the cveryday 
fugitive wav in which we keep on saying “P? must be understood in terms 
of our authentic potential .for-Zeing, then the propesition that the Self 
is the basis of cars ang covatantiy present-at-hang, is one that still does 
not follow. Sel use. are diacerned existentially only in one’s authentic 


potentiate?’ ti a. mee Seif—thar is to say, in the authenticity of 
Dasein’s Dani. 2... in terrns of care the constancy of the Seif, as the 
supposed persi isro oT ine subjectum, gets clarified. But the phenomenon 
of this authenti por tvuity-for-Being also opens our eyes for the constancy 
of the Self in the seose of us having achieved some sort of position.! The 
constancy of the Vat in the double sense of steadiness and steadfastness, is 


the authenits coutesc-posstbility to the non-Self-constancy which is charac- 
teristic of irresvhice teling.* Fxistentially, “‘Self-constancy” signifies nothing 
other than antivinstore vesoli:teness. The ontological structure of such 
resoluteness revei rte existentiality of the Self’s Seifhood. 

Dasein is aati Sut ieelf in the primordial individualization of the 
reticent resoluieiw. which exacts anxiety of itself. As something that keeps 


If). für die Siinag cet des Selbst in dem Sinn des Standgewonnenhabens.’ Here our 
usual translation of o uccigkei’ as ‘constancy’ seems inadequate; possibly ‘stability’ 
would be cioser i: wos? Ss meant. 

8 ‘Die Ständigkei as: elbs: im Doppelsinne der beständigen Standfestigkeit ist cic 
eigentliche Gegenmägl vateit zur Unselbst-ständigkeit des unentschlossenen Verfallens.’ 
The italicization cf ths scseniig words of this sentence appears only in the later editions. 

Herr, as on H. :i7 and 303, Heidegger exploits various meanings of the adjective 
‘standig’ and ctäst v ads derived from the base ‘sta-’, with the root-meaning of 
‘standing’. The rova ‘i "nselbstandigkeit’ ordinarily stands for inability to stand on 
one’s own feet as ir. ‘hake up one’s mind independently. But Heidegger expands it 
to ‘Unselbst-standivicc’, which not only suggests instability and a failure to stand by 
oneself, but also the: “v:siancy or stability of that which is other than the Self-—the 
non-Self, or more se cally, the they-self. In the following sentence the noun ‘Selb- 
ständigkeit’, which cr arily stands tor autonomy. tedenendence, or sal. bustence, Is 


similarly expanced ‘© nst-ctandigkeic’-—‘Self-cons car y’, 


pf ae 


324 


370 Being and Time 11.3 


silent, authentic Being-one’s-Self is just the sort ofthing that does not keep 
on saying ‘I’; but in its reticence it ‘is’ that thrown entity as which it can 
authentically be. The £.)f which the reticence of resolute existence un- 
veils is the ‚;imöordial r. 2nomenal basis for ihe q} -stion as to the Being 


of the ‘P. © ulv ifwe -oriented phenomena ©. vy th:. meaning of the 
Being of i authen} _.ten:alits-ior-Beitip-: ./s-Self are we put in a 
position to discuss v ontological justi at the is for treating 
substantiai::,, simplic , ap personality as ..:-. ...ücg of Selfhood. 
In the prevalent way of savioy “I”, it is constantı, i. crested that what 
we have in advance a Se!i-Thing, ne w.  at-at-hand; the 
ontologicu! question «. che amg of the Self ‚u. . away from any 


such sugges:ion. 
Care does iat need to ve founded in a Self. But ex. aii as constitutive for 


care, provides the ontologi-«! constitution of Dasein‘: sss. agy, to which there 
belongs, in accordance wit the tull structural corses: if car, its Being-fallen 
factwally into non-Self-constancy. When fully conce: 1, t: e care-structure 


includes the phenomenon of Selfhood. This pher: nenon is clarified by 
Interpreting the meaning of care; and it is as caı <hat Dasein’s totality 
of Being has been defined. 


“65. Temporality as the Ontological Meaning of Care | 
In characterizing the ‘connection’ between care and Selfhood, our aim 


_ was not only to clarify the special problem of “I”-hood, but also to help 


in the final preparation for getting into our grasp phenomenally the 
totality of Dasein’s structural whole. We need the unwavering discipline of 
the existential way of putting the question, if, for our ontological point of 
view, Dasein’s kind of Being is not to be finally perverted into a mode of 
presence-at-hand, even one which is wholly undifferentiated. Dasein 
becomes ‘essentially’ Dasein in that authentic existence which constitutes 
itself as anticipatory resoluteness.1 Such resoluteness, as a mode of the 
authenticity of care, contains Dasein’s primordial Self-constancy and 
totality. We must take an undistracted look at these and understand 
them existentially if we are to lay bare the ontological meaning of Dasein’ s 
Being. 

What are we seeking ontologically with the meaning of care? What 
does “meaning” signify? In our investigation, we have encountered this 
phenomenon in connection with the analysis of understanding and inter- 
pretation xii According to that analysis, meaning is that wherein the 
understandability [Verstehbarkeit] of something maintains itself—even 


1 ‘Das Dasein wird “wesentlich” in der-eigentlichen Bienes die sich als vorlaufende 
Entschlossenheit konstituiert.’ 


Il. 3 Being and Time 371 
that of something which does not come into view explicitly and thematic- 
ally. “Meaning” signifies the “upon-which’” [das Woraufhin] ofa primary 
projection in terms of which something can be conceived in its possibility 
as that which it is. Projecting discloses possibiJitres—that is to say, it 
discloses the sort -f thing that makes possible. . 

To lay bare the “upon-which” of a projection, amounts to disclosing 
that which makes possible what has been projected.! To lay it bare in this 
way requires methodologically that we study the projection (usually a 
tacit one) which underlies an interpretation, and that we do so in such a 
way that what has been projected in the projecting can be disclosed and 
grasped with regard to its ““upon-which”. To set forth the meaning of 
care means, then, to follow up the projection which guides and underlies 
the primordial existential Interpretation of Dasein, and to follow it up in 
such a way that in what is here projected, its “‘upon-which” may be seen. 
What has been projected is the Being of Dasein, and it is disclosed in what 
constitutes that Being as an authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole.? 
That upon which the Being which has been disclosed and is thus con- 
stituted has been projected, is that which itself makes possible this Con- 
stitution of Being as care. When we inquire about the meaning of care, we 
are asking what makes possible the totality of the articulated structural whole of 
care, in the unity of its articulation as we have unfolded it. 

Taken strictly, “meaning” signifies the ‘‘upon-which”’ of the primary 
projection of the understanding of Being. When Being-in-the-world has 
been disclosed to itself and understands the Being of that entity which it 
itself is, it understands equiprimordially the Being of entities discovered 
within-the-world, even ifsuch Being has not been made a theme, and has 
not yet even been differentiated into its primary modes of existence and 
Reality. All ontical experience of entities—both circumspective calcula- 
tion of the ready-to-hand, and positive scientific cognition of the present- 
at-hand—is based upon projections of the Being of the corresponding 
entities—projections which in every case are more or less transparent. 
But in these projections there lies hidden the “upon-which” of the 
projection; and on this, as it were, the understanding of Being nourishes 
“itself. 

If we say that entities ‘have meaning’, this signifies that they have 
become accessible in their Being; and this Being, as projected upon its 


1 ‘Das Woraufhin eines Entwurfs freilegen, besagt, das erschliessen, was das Entworfene 
ermöglicht.’ This sentence is ambiguous in that ‘das Entworfene’ (‘what is projected’) 
-may be either the subject or the direct object of ‘ermöglicht’ (‘makes possible’). 

% ‘Das Entworfene ist das Sein des Daseins und zwar erschlossen in dem, was es als 
eigentliches Ganzseinkönnen konstituiert.’ This sentence too is ambiguous in its structure; 
we have chosen the interpretation which seems most plausible in the light of the following 
sentence. 


372 Being and Time — IL. 3 


“upon-which”, is what ‘really’ ‘has meaning’ first of all. Entities ‘have’ 
meaning only because, as Being which has been disclosed beforehand, 
they become intelligible in the projection of that Being—that is to say, in 
terms of the ‘“‘upon-which”’ of that projection. The primary projection 
of the understanding of Being ‘gives’ the meaning. The question about 
the meaning of the Being of an entity takes as its theme the “‘upon- 
which” of that understanding of Being which underlies all Being of 
entities.! 

Dasein is either authentically or inauthentically disclosed to itself as 
regards its existence. In existing, Dasein understands itself, and in such a 
way, indeed, that this understandin gdoes not merely get something in its 
grasp, but makes up the existentiell Being of its factical potentiality-for- 
Being. The Being which is disclosed is that of an entity for which this 
Being is an issue. The meaning of this Being—that is, of care—is what 
makes care possible in its Constitution; and it is what makes up prim- 
ordially the Being of this potentiality-for-Being. The meaning of Dasein’s 
Beirg is not something free-floating which is other than and ‘outside of’ 
itself, but is the self-understanding Dasein itself. What makes possible 
the Being of Dasein, and therewith its factical existence? 

That which was projected in the primordial existential projection of 
existence has revealed itself as anticipatory resoluteness. What makes this 
authentic Being-a-whole of Dasein possible with regard to the unity of 
its articulated structural whole ?* Anticipatory resoluteness, when taken 
formally and existentially, without our constantly designating its full 
structural content, is Being towards one’s ownmost, disiinctive potentiality- 
for-Being. This sort of thing is possible only in that Dasein can, 
indeed, come towards itself in its ownmost possibility, and that it can put 
up with this possibility as a possibility in thus letting itself come towards 
itself—in other words, that it exists. This letting-itself-come-towards-itself 
in that distinctive possibility which it puts up with, is the primordial 
phenomenon of the future as coming towards.” If either authentic or 


1 ‘Die Frage nach dem Sinn des Seins eines Seienden macht das Woraufhin des allem 
Sem von Seiendem zugrundeliegenden Seinsverstehens zum Thema.’ The earlier editions 
read *. . . des allem ontischen Sein zu Scicndem...’ (‘. . . all ontical Being towards 
entities...) 

2 Was ermoglici:t dieses eigentliche Ganzsein des Daseins hinsichtlich der Einheit 
seines gr s'isderten Strukturganeeci ™ 

"Mas Ge ausgezeichnete Moylicl zeit aushaltende, in ih: sich auf sich Zukommen- 
lassen ist das ursprüngliche Poháromen der Zu-kunft.’ Wi ile Cie hyphen in ‘Zukommen- 


arsch aprears only in tho lacr ediuas, the more impertas hyphen in ‘Zu-kunfl’ appears 
In Lath imer and earher cities. ai the laser editioas, however, !t comes at the end of the 
HLO 30 lat! the force which cas rusie :bly intended is lu: t. 


. ar ut th: hyphen, “oi. A'i ae oruinary word for ‘she tinture’; with the hyphen, 
Henleygor ovideatly wishes cas acikaton to its kinship with ihe expression “zukommen 


II. 3 l Being and Time 373 


inauthentic Being-towards-death belongs to Dasein’s Being, then such 
Being-towards-death is possible only as something futural [als zukün- 
jtges|, in the sense which we have now indicated, and which we 
have still to define more closely. By the term ‘futural’, we do not here 
have in view a “now” which has not yet become ‘actual’ and which some- 
time will be for the first time. We have in view the coming [Kunft] in 
which Dasein, in its ownmost potentiality-for-Being, comes towards itself. 
Anticipation makes Dasein authentically futural, and in such away that the 
anticipation itself is possible only in so far as Dasein, as being, is always 
coming towards itself—that is to say, in so far as it is futural in its Being 
in general. | 

Anticipatory resoluteness understands Dasein in its own essential 
Being-guilty. This understanding means that in existing one takes over 
Being-guilty; it means being the thrown basis of nullity. But taking 
over thrownness signifies being Dasein authentically as it‘already was. 
Taking over thrownness, however, is possible only in such a way that the 
futural Dasein can be its ownmost ‘as-it-already-was’—that is tọ say, its 
‘been’ [sein ““Gewesen”’]. Only in so far as Dasein is as an ‘‘I-am-as-having- 
been”, can Dasein come towards itself futurally in such a way that it 
comes back.* As authentically futural, Dasein is authentically as “having 
been’’.® Anticipation of one’s uttermost and ownmost possibility is coming 
back understandingly to one’s ownmost “‘been’’. Only so far as it is futural 
can Dasein be authentically as having been. The character of “‘having 
been” arises, in a certain way, from the füture.* 

Anticipatory resoluteness discloses the current Situatisr. of the “there” 
in such a way that existence, in taking acticn, is circu:r:spectively con- 
cerned with what is factically ready-to-hand environmentally. Resolute 


on 


auf...’ (‘to come towards...’ or ‘to come up . ond its deriv=tion from ‘zu’ (‘to’ 


or ‘towards’) and ‘kommen’ (‘come’). Hence ou” .. +3. (The use of ‘zukommen’ with 
the preposition ‘auf’ is to be distinguished from :. - :his same {verb with the dative 
which we have met in earlier chapters in the se:s * “‘usiongs‘to. . .’, ‘is becoming 


to...’, or ‘has coming to...’.) 

1 ‘Übernahme der Geworfenheit aber bedeutet, 12s ='25-. 7: in dem, wie es je schon war, 
eigentlich sein.’ 

3 ‘Nur sofern Dasein überhaupt ist als ich bin-gew eves. kun es zukünftig auf sich selbst 
so zukommen, dass es zurück-kommt.’ Many Genn’: verbs torm their perfect tense with 
the help of the auxiliary ‘sein’ (‘to be’) in place of che somewhat more usual ‘haben’ 
(‘have’), just as we sometimes say in English ‘he is gone’ instead of ‘he. has gone’. 
Among such verbs is ‘sein’ itself. This ‘I have been‘ is expressed by ‘ich bin gewesen’; this 
might be translated as ‘I am been’, but in this context we lave ventured to translate it as 
‘I am as having been’. 

3 ‘Eigentlich zukünftig ist das Dasein eigentlich gewesen. 

4 ‘Die Gewesenheit entspringt in gewisser Weise der Zukunft.’ Here “The character of 
having been’ represents ‘Die Gewesenheit’ (literally, "beeiıhood’). Heidegger distinguishes 
this sharply from ‘die Vergangenheit’ (‘pastness’). We shall frequently translate ‘Gewesen- 
heit’ simply as ‘having been’. ö | 


326 


ss 
nt 


374 Being and Time 11.3 


Being-alongside what is ready-to-hand in the Situation—that 1s to say, 
taking action in such a way as to let one encounter what has presence 
environmentally—is possible only by making such an entity present. Only 
as the Present [Gegenwart|) in the sense of making present, can resoluteness 
be what it is: namely, letting itself be encountered undisguisedly by that 
which it seizes upon in taking action. 

Coming back to itself futurally, resoluteness brings itself ito the 
Situation by making present. The character of “having been” arises from 
the future, and in such a way that the future which “‘has been” (or better, 
which “is in the process of having been”) releases from itself the Present.” 
This phenomenon has the unity of a future which makes present in 
the process of having been; we designate it as ‘‘temporality”’.? Only in so 
far as Dasein has the definite character of temporality, is the authentic 
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole of anticipatory resoluteness, as we have 
described it, made possible for Dasein itself. Temporality reveals itself as the 
meaning of authentic care. 

The phenomenal centent of this meaning, drawn from the state of 
Being of anticipatory resoluteness, fills in the signification of the term 
“temporality”. In ovr terminological use of this expression, we must hold 
ourselves alcof from all those significations of ‘future’, ‘past’, and ‘Present’ 
which thrust themselves upon us from the ordinarv concention of time. 
This holds also for conceptions of a ‘time’ which is ‘subjective’ or ‘Objec- 
uve’, ‘immanent’ or ‘transcendent’. Inasrauch as Dasein understands 
itself in a way which, proximally and for the most part, is tnruthentic, we 
may suppose that ‘time’ as ordinarily understood does indeed represent 
a genuine phenomenon, but one which is derivative [ein atkinftiges]. It 
arises from inauthentic termporality, which has a source of its own. The 
conceptions of ‘future’, “past” and ‘Present’ have first arisen in terms of 
the inauthexiic way of understanding time. In terminologically delimiting 
the primordial and authentic phenomena which correspond to these, we 
have to struggle against the same difficulty which keeps all ontological 
terminology in its grip. When violences are done in this field of investiga- 
tien, chey are net acbitrary but have a necessity grounded in the 
facts. If, however, we are to point out without gaps in the argument, 
now inauthéntic teraporality has its source in temporality which is 


l On our expressions ‘having presence’, ra present’, and ‘the Present’, see our 
notes I and 2, p. 47, and 2, p. 48 on H. 25 above 
® ‘Die Gewesenheit entsoringt der Zukunft, so Zwar, dass die gewesene (besser gewe- 
sende) Zukunft die Gegenwart aus sich entlässt.’ Heidegger has coined the form ‘gewe- 
send’ by { Fusing the past participle ‘ gewesen’ with the suffix of the present participle 
d’, as ifin English one were to write ‘beening’. 
‘Diez _dergestalt als gewesend-gegenwärtigende Zukunft einheitliche Phänomen 
nennen wir die Zaillichkeit.’ 


II. 3 Being and Time 375 
primordial and authentic, the primordial phenomenon, which we have 
described only in a rough and ready fashion, must first be worked out 
correctly. 

If resoluteness makes up the mode of authentic care, and if this itself 
is possible only through temporality, then the phenomenon at which we 
have arrived by taking a lock at resoluteness, must present us with only 
a modality of temporality, by which, after all, care as such is made 
possible. Dasein’s totality of Being as care means: ahead-of-itself-already- 
being-in (a world) as Being-alongside (entities encountered within-the- 
world), When we first fixed upon this articulated structure, we suggested 
that with regard to this articulation the ontological question must be 
pursued still further back until the unity of the totality of this structural 
manifnidness has ‘een laid bare. The primordial unity of the structure of 
care tes in temporality. 

The “ahead-of-itself” is grounded in the Fiture. In the “Being-already- 
in...’’, the character of “having been” is made kr.own. ““Being-alongside 
e” becomes possible ir. making present. While the “ahead” includes the 
notion cf 2 “before”! neither the ‘before’ in the ‘ahead’ nor the ‘already’ 
is ig be takon in terms of th- way time is ordinarily understood; this hag 
bern avtometically rated aut by what has been said above. With this 
hebr we do wot have ic miré “in advance of something’ [das ““Vorher’”) 
in th: sonse cf tot yet omw bt ister’; the ‘alreecy’ is Just as far frorn 
dmi viag fno longer now- hut carter’. If the expressions ‘before’ ani 
‘already’ were ta hav? a une cs ented [zeithafte! signification such as 
das (and they can have his sif nification tco), ther. to say that care has 
temporality would be t say scat it is something which is ‘earlier’ and 
‘later’, ‘not yet’ and ‘no ic- ger’. Care would then decor.ceived as an entity 
which occurs and runs its course ‘in time’. The Being cf an entity having 
the character of Dasein wouid become something preseni-at-hand. If this 
sort of thing is impossible, then any time-oriented signification which th: 
expressions we have mentioned may have, must be difierent from this. 
The ‘before’ and the ‘ahead’ indicate the future as <fa sort which woulé 
make it possible for Dasein to be such that its petentiality-for-Being $s 
an issue.” Self-projection upon the ‘for-the-sake-ofoneself’ is grounded in 

1 We have interpolated this clause in our translation to give point to Heideggez’s 
remark about ‘the “before” in the “ahead” ’ (‘das “Vor” im “Varweg” '), which is 
obvious enough in German but would otherwise seem very far-fetched in English. We. 

have of course met the expression ‘vor’ in many contexts—in ‘Vorhabe’, ‘Vorsicht’, 25d 
'Vorgz iff’ as ‘fore-structures’ of understanding (H. 140), and in such expressions as “thst in 
the face of which’ (‘das “Wovor” ’) one fears or fices or hus anxiety (H. 140, 184, 51, 
etc.). Here, however, the translation ‘before’ seems more appropriate. i 

2 ‘Das “vor” und “vorweg” zeigt die Zukunft an, als welche sie überhaupt erst erın"3- 
licht, dass Dasein o sein kann, dass es ihm son sein Seinkönnen geht.’ The pronoun ‘uc 

« Appears only in the later editions. 


328 


376 Being and Time IT. 3 
the future and is an essential characteristic of extsteniiahty. The primary 
meaning of existentiality is the future. 

Likewise, with the ‘already’ we have in view the existential temporal 
meaning of the Being of that entity which, in so far ag it ts, is already 
something that has been thrown. Only because care is based on the 
character of “having been”, can Dasein exist as the thrown entity which 
it is. ‘As long as’ Dasein factically exists, it is never past [vergangen], but it 
always is indeed as already having deen, in the sense of the ‘‘] am-as-having- 
been”. And only as long as Das¢in is, can it b¢ as having been. On the 
other hand, we call an entity “past”, when it is no longer present-at-hand, 
Therefore Dasein, in existing, can neyer establish itself as a fact which is 
present-at-hand, arising and passing away ‘in the course of time’, with a 
bit of it past already. Dasein never ‘finds itself’ except as a thrown Fact. 
In the state-of-mind in which it finds itself, Dasein is assailed hy itself aa the 
entity which it still is and already was—that is to say, which it constantly. 
is as having been.! The primary existential meaning of facticity lies in 
the character of “having been”. In our formulation of the structure of care, 
the temporal meaning of existentiality and facticity is indicated by the 
expressions ‘before’ and ‘already’, | 

On the other hand, we lack such an indication for the third i item which 
is constitutive for care—the Being-alongside which falls. This should not 
signify that falling is not also grounded in temporality; it should instead 
give us a hint that making-present, as the primary basis for falling into the 
ready-to-hand and present-at-hand with which we concern ourselves, 
remains included in the future and in having been, and is included in 
these in the mode of primordial temporality. When resolute, Dasein has 
brought itself back from falling, and has done so precisely in order to be 
more authentically ‘there’ in the ‘moment of zision’ as regards the Sjtuation 
which has been disclosed.® 

Temporality makes possible the unity of existence, facticity, and falling, 
and in this way constitutes primordially the totality of the structure of 
care. The items of care have not been pieced together cumulatively any 
more than temporality itself has been put together ‘in the course of time’ 
[‘‘mit der Zeit’’] out of the future, the having been, and the Present.. 


1 ‘In der Befindlichkeit wird das Dasein von ihm selbst überfallen als das Sciende, das. 
es, noch seiend, schon war, das heisst gewesen ständig ist.’ We have expanded our usual 
translation of ‘Befindlichkeit’ to bring out better the connection with the previous . 
sentence. l 

$ ‘Emtschlossen hat sich das Dasein gerade zurückgeholt aus dem Verafallen, um desto 
eigentlicher im “Augenblick” auf die erschlossene Situation “da” zu sein.’ The German 
word ‘Augenblick’ has hitherto been translated simply as ‘moment’; but here, and in 
many later passages, Heidegger has in mind its more literal meaning—' a glance of the 

', In 63 below, Specially it seems Hoes. appropriate to translate it as ‘moment of vision’. See 
vers H.3 


Il. 3 Being and Time | 377 
Temporality ‘is’ not an entiy at all. Itis not, but it temporalizes itself. 
Nevertheless, we cannot avoid saying, “Temporality “‘is’’', . . the meaning 
of care’, ‘Temporality “is”. . . . defined in such and such a way’; the 
reason for this can be made intelligible only when we have clarified the 
idea of Reing and that of the ‘is’ in general. Temporality temporalizes, 
and indeed it temporalizes possible ways of itself. These make possible the 
multiplicity of Dasein’s modes of Being, and especially the basic en 
of authentic or inauthentic existence. 

The future, the character of having been, and the ER show 
the phenomenal characteristics of the ‘towards-oneself’, the ‘back- 
to’, and the ‘letting-oneself-be-encountered-by’.! The phenomena.of the 
“towards... .”, the “to . . .”, and the “alongside .. .”, make tegfipdrality 
manifest as the dara pure and simple. Temporality i is the primordial ‘out- 
side-of-itself” in and for itself. We therefore call the phenomena of the future, 
the character of having been, and the Fresent, the “ecstases” of temporality.® 
Temporality is not, prior to this, art entity which first emerges from itself; its 
essence is a process of temporalizing in the unity ofthe ecstases. What is char- 


acteristic of the ‘time’ which is accessible to the ordinary understanding, 


consists, among other things, precisely in the fact that it is a pure sequence 
of “nows”, without beginning and without end, in which’ the ecstatical 
character of primordial temporality has been levelled off. But this very 


levelling off, in accordance with its existențial meaning, is grounded in. 


the possibility of a definite kind of temporalizing, in conformity with 
which temporality temporalizes as inauthentic the kind of ‘time’ we have 
just mentioned. If, therefore, we demonstrate that the ‘time’ which is 
accessible to Dasein’s common sense is not primordial, but arises rather 
from authentic temporality, then, in accordance with the principle, ‘‘a 
potiori fit denominatio”, we are justified in designating as “primordial time” 
the temporality which we have now laid bare. 

1 ‘Zukunft, Gewesenheit, Gegenwart zeigen die phänomenalen Charaktere des “‘Auf- 
un des “Zurück auf” , des “"Begegnenlassens von”.' On these expressions cf. H. 326 
8 

8 ‘Die Phänomene deszu...,auf..., bei. . . offenbaren die Zeitlichkeit als das éxcrarixdy 
schlechthin. Zeitlichkeit ist das wrsprüngliche “Ausser-sich” an und für sich selbst. Wir nennen 
daher die charakterisierten Phänomene Zukunft, Gewesenheit, Gegenwart die Ekstasen 
der Zeitlichkeit.’ 

The connection of the words ‘zu’, ‘auf’, and ‘bei’ with the expressions listed in the 


pfeceding sen: nce, is somewhat obscure even in the German, and is best clarified by a 
study of the preceding pages. Briefly the correlation seems to be as follows: 


zu: Zukunft; aufsich zukommen; Auf-sich-zu; Sich-vorweg. 
- wesenucit; zurückkommen auf; Zurück auf; Schon-sein-in. 
bei: Gegenwart Begegnenlassen de Sein-bei. 


The- root-meanin of the word ‘ecstasis’ (Greek dnaranıs; een: ‘Ekstase’) is 
‘standing outside’. Used generally in Greek for the ‘removal’ or ' ne, of some- 
thing, it came to be applied to states-of-mind which we would now call ‘ecstatic’. Heideg- 
ger usually k the basic root-meaning in mind, but he also is keenly aware of its close 
connection with the root-meaning of the word ‘existence’. 


329 


330 


378 Being and Time HI. 3 


In enumerating the ecstases, we have always mentioned the future first: 
We have done this to indicate that the future has a priority in the ecstatica! 
unity of primordial and authentic temporality. This is so, even though 
temporality does not first arise through a cumulative sequence of the 
ecstases, but in each case temporalizes itself in their equiprimordiality. 
But within this equiprimordiality, the modes of temporalizing are different. 
The difference lies in the fact that the nature of the temporalizing can 
be determined primarily in terms of the different ecstases. Primordial and 
authentic temporality temporalizes itself in terms of the authentic 
future and in such a way that in- having been futurally, it first of 
ali awakens the Present. The primary phenomenon of primordial and authentic 
temporality ts the future. The priority of the future will vary according to the 
ways in which the temporalizing of inauthentic temporality itself is 
modified, but it will still come to the fore even in the derivative kind of 
‘time’? 

Care is Being-towards-death. We hate defined “‘anticipatery resolute- 
ness” as authentic Being towards the possibility which we have character- 
ized as Dasein’s utter impossibility. In such Being-towards-its-end, Dase: 
ists m a way which is authentically whole as that entity which it can be 
when ‘thrown into death’. This entity does not have an end at which if 
just stops, but it exists finitely. “The zuthentic future is tcraporalized pri- 
saarly by that temporality whi’: makes up the ıneaning of anticipatory 
resobutesesss it thus reveals itsel as finite.“ Bui ‘does not tinie go on’ in 
spate of my own v0-longer-Dastin?*> And can there not be an unlimited 
sumber of things which still iie “n the future’ and come along out of it? 

We mus? answer these questions affirmatively. In spite of this, they do 
mut contain any objections to the finitude of primordia! temporality— 
because this is something which is no longer handled by these at ali. 
The question is not about everything that still can happen ‘in a time that 
goes on’, or about what kind of letting-come-towards-oneself we can 
encounter ‘out of this time’, but about how “‘coming-towards-oneself” is, 
as such, to be primordially defined. Its finitude does not amount primarily 
to a stopping, but is a characterisitic of temporalization itself. ‘The prim- 
ordial and authentic future is the “‘towards-oneself”’ (to oneself!),* existing 


i*,,. dasi me ig gewesen allererst die Gegenwart weckt.’ 

3"... noch in der abkünftigen “‘Zeit”." Here Heidegger is contrasting the zuthentic 
kind of time in which Dasein ‘comes towards’ itself futurally (“auf sich zu 
zukünftig’) with the inauthentic kind of time which ‘comes off’ from this or is ‘ 
from it [a de], and which is thus of a ‘derivative’ [‘abkinfug’] character. | 

3* . . sondern existiert endlich.’ 

* ‘Die eigentliche Zukunft, die primär die Zeitlichkeit zeitigt, die den Sinn der vorlaa» 
fenden Entschlossenheit ausmacht, enthüllt sich damit selbst als sudliche.’ 

è ‘Allein san trotz des Nichtmehrdaseins meiner selbst ‘die Zeit nicht weiter” ”® 

@*... das Auf-sich-zu, auf sick...’ ze 


- 
‘ 


II. 3 Being and Time 379 


as the possibility of nullity, the possibility which is not to be outstripped. 

` The ecstatical character of the primordial future lies precisely in the fact 
that the future closes one’s potentiality-for-Being; that is to say, the 
future itself is closed to one,? and as such it makes possible the resolute 
existentiell understanding of nullity. Pririordial and authentic coming- 
towards-oneself is the meaning of existing in one’s ownmost nullity. In 
our thesis that temporality is primordially finite, we are not disputing 
that ‘time goes on’; we are simply holding fast to the phenomenal char- 
acter of primordial temporality—a character which shows itself ir. what 
is projected in Daseui’s primordial existential projecting. 

The temptation to overlook the finitude of the primordial and authentic 
future and therefore the finitude of temporality, or alternauvely, to hold 
“a priori’ that such finitude is impossible, arises from the way in which the 
ordinary understanding of time is constantly thrusting itself to the fore, 
Ifthe ordinary understanding is right in knowing a time which is endless, 
and in knowing only this, it has not yet heen demonstrated that it also 
understands this time and its ‘infinity’. What does it mean to say, “Tirne 
gG2s on’ or ae keep passing away?’ Vha: is the signification of ‘in 
trce in general, and of the expressions ‘in the future’ and ‘out of the 
five’ in particular? In what sense is ‘rae’ endless? Such zomis need te 
te Cicared up, ifthe ordinary objecticrs tc the Geitude of primordia! time 
de Rot io remain groundiess. But we can clear chem up eifectively oniy 


n~ 


if we have obtained an appropriate wi) 7" seems he ouestion ar 
regaras Anitude and in-finitude.? Such _ nation, however, arses ok 
if we view the primordial pheaomencs: of tiae underst edwar. The 
problem is not one of ow? the ‘derive! “Sabveleizete) irfirdte Cie. Ss 
which, the ready-to-hand arises and pess: away, becomes pstmerd: ! = ‚te 


temporatity; the problem is rather that of how inauthentic temper liiy 
arises out of finite authentic temporality, and how inauthentic ts:avorality, 
as inauthentic, temporalizes an im-finite time out of the finite. Only 
because primordial time is finite can the ‘derived’ time temporalize 
itself as infintte. In the order in which we get things into our grasp 
through the understanding, the finitude of time does not become fully 
visible until we have exhibited ‘endless time’ so that these m2; be 
contrasted. 


. dass sie das Seinkönnen achliesst, das heisst selbst geschlossen ist . . .” The verb 
u as here used, may mean either to close or shut, or to conclude or r bring to an 
er Presumably the author has both senses in mind. 

. hinsichtlich der Epdlichkeit und Un-endlichkeit . . .” We have tried to preserve 

* Heidegger s orthographic distinction between ‘Unendlichkeit’ and ‘Un-endlichkeit’ by 
4 translating the former as ‘infinity’, the latter as ‘in-finitude’. We shall similarly use 
‘infinite’ and ‘un-finite’ for “unendlich” and ‘un-endlich’ respectively. 
' 8 This word (‘ste’) is italicized only in the later editions. 


932 


380 Being and Time II. 3 
Our analysis of primordial temporality up to this point may be sum- 
marized in the following theses. Time is primordial as the temporalizing 
of temporality, and as such it makes possible the Constitution of the 
structure of care. Temporality is essentially ecstatical. Temporality tem- 
poralizes itself primordially out of the future. Primordial time is finite. 
However, the Interpretation of care as temporality cannot remain 
restricted to the narrow basis obtained so far, even if it has taken us the 
first steps along our way in viewing Dasein’s primordial and authentic 


_Being-a-whole. The thesis that the meaning of Dasein is temporality must 


be confirmed in the concrete content of this entity’s basic state, as it has 
been set forth. 


{ 66. Dasein’s Temporality and the Tasks Arising Therefrom of Repeating the 
Existential Analysis in a more Primordial Manner 

Not only does the phenomenon of temporality which we have laid bare 
demand a more widely-ranging confirmation of its constitutive power, 
but only through such confirmation will it itself come into view as regards 
the basic possibilities of temporalizing. The demonstration of the pos- 
sibility of Dasein’s state of Being on the basis of temporality will be 


designated in brief—though only provisjonally—as “the ‘temporal’ Inter- 


pretation”. 

Our next task is to go beyond the temporal analysis of Dasein’s authentic 
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole and a general characterization of the 
temporality of care so that Dasein’s inauthenticity may be made visible in 
its own specific temporality. Temporality first showed itself in anticipatory 
resoluteness, This is the authentic mode of disclosedness, though dis- 
closedness maintains itself for the most part in the inauthenticity with 
which the “they” fallingly interprets itself. In characterizing the tempor- 
ality of disclosedness in general, we are led to the temporal understanding 
of that concernful Being-in-the-world which lies-closest to us, and therefore 
of the average undifferentiatedness of Dasein from which the existential 


analytic first took its start.“21Y We have called Dasein’s average kind of 


Being, in which it maintains itself proximally and for the most part, 
“everydayness”. By repeating the earlier analysis, we must reveal every- 
dayness in its temporal meaning, so that the problematic included in 
temporality may come to light, and the seemingly ‘obvious’ character of 
the preparatory analyses may completely disappear. Indeed, confirmation 
is to be found for temporality in all the essential structures of Dasein’s 
basic constitution. Yet this will not lead to running through our analyses 
again superficially and schematically in the same sequence of presentation. 
The course of our temporal analysis is directed otherwise: it is to make 


Il. 3 Being and Time | 381 
plainer the interconnection of our earlier considerations and to do away 
with whatever is accidental and seemingly arbitrary. Beyond these neces- 
sities of method, however, the phenomenon itself gives us motives which 
compel us to articulate our analysis in a different way when we repeat it. 

The ontological structure of that entity which, in each case, I myself 
am, centres in the Self-subsistence [Selbstandigkeit] of existence. Because 
the Self cannot be conceived either as substance or as subject but is 
grounded in existence, our analysis of the inauthentic Self, the “they”, 
has been left wholly in tow of the preparatory Interpretation of Dasein.*V 
Now that Selfhood has been explicitly taken back into the structure of 
care, and therefore of temporality, the temporal Interpretation of Self- 
constancy and non-Self-constancy! acquires an importance of its own. 
This Interpretation needs to be carried through separately and themati- 
cally. However, it not only gives us the right kind of insurance against the 
paralogisms and against ontologically inappropriate questions about the 
Being of the “I” in general, but it provides at the same time, in accor- 
dance with its central function, a more primordial insight into the 
temporalization-structure of temporality, which reveals itself as the histori- 
cality of Dasein. The proposition, “Dasein is historical”, is confirmed as a 
fundamental existential ontological assertion. This assertion is far removed 
from the mere ontical establishment of the fact that Dasein occurs in a 
‘world-history’. But the historicality of Dasein is the basis for a possible 
kind of historiological understanding which in turn carries with it the 
possibility of getting a special grasp of the development of historiology 
as a science. 

By Interpreting everydayness and historicality temporally we shall get 
a steady enough view of primordial time to expose it as the condition 
which makes the everyday experience of time both possible and necessary. 
As an entity for which its Being is an issue, Dasein utilizes itself primarily 
for itself [verwendet sich . . . für sich selbst], whether it does so explicitly or 
not. Proximally and for the most part, care is circumspective concern. 
In utilizing itself for the sake of itself, Dasein ‘uses itself up’. In using itself 
up, Dasein uses itself—that is to say, its time.? In using time, Dasein 
reckons with it. Time is first discovered in the concern which reckons 


_ 1... Selbst-standigkeit und Unselbst-ständigkeit.....’ Cf. note 2, p. 369, H. 322. 

2 “‘Umwillen seiner selbst verwendend, “verbraucht” sich das Dasein. Sichverbruchend 
braucht das Dascin sich selbst, dass heisst seine Zeit.’ Here three verbs, all of which might 
sometimes be translated as ‘use’, are contrasted rather subtly. ‘Verwenden’ means 
literally to ‘turn something away’, but is often used in the sense of ‘turning something to 
account’, ‘utilizing it’; in a reflexive construction such as we have here, it often takes on 
the more special meaning of ‘applying oneself’ on someone’s behalf. (In previous passage: 
we have generally translated ‘verwenden’ as ‘use’.) ‘Verbraucken’ means to ‘consume’ 
or ‘use up’. ‘Brauchen’ too means to ‘use’; but it also means to ‘need’, and it is hard to teil 
which of these senses Heidegger here has in mind. 


333 


382 Being and Time IT. 3 
circumspectively, and this concern leads to the development of a time- 
reckoning. Reckoning with time is constitutive for Being-in-the-world. 
Concernful circumspective discovering, in reckoning with its time, permits 
those things which we have discovered, and which are ready-to-hand or 
present-at-hand, to be encountered in time. Thus entities within-the- 
world become accessible as ‘being in time’. We call the temporal attribute 
of entities within-the-world “‘within-time-ness” [die Innerzeitkeit]. The kind 
of ‘time’ which is first found ontically in within-time-ness, becomes the 
basis on which the ordinary traditional conception of time takes form. 
But time, as within-time-ness, arises from an essential kind of temporalizing 
of primordial temporality. The fact that this is its source, tells us that the 
time ‘in which’ what is present-at-hand arises and passes away, is a genuine 
phenomenon of time; it is not an externalization of a ‘qualitative time’ 
into space, as Bergson’s Interpretation of time—which is ontologically 
quite indefinite and inadequate—would have us believe. 

In working out the temporality of Dasein as everydayness, historicality, 
and within-time-ness, we shall be getting for the first time a relentless 
insight into the complications of a primordial ontology of Dasein. As Being- 
in-the-world, Dasein exists factically with and alongside entities which it 
encounters within-the-world. Thus Dasein’s Being becomes ontologically 
transparent in a comprehensive way only within the horizon! in which 
the Being of entities other than Dasein—and this means even of those 
which are neither ready-to-hand nor present-at-hand but just ‘subsist’— 
has been clarified. But if the variations of Being are to be Interpreted for 
everything of which we say, “It is’, we need an idea of Being in general, 
and this idea needs to have been adequately illumined in advance. So 
long as this idea is one at which we have not yet arrived, then the temporal 
analysis of Dasein, even if we repeat it, will remain incomplete and fraught 
with obscurities; we shall not go on to talk about the objective 
difficulties. The existential-temporal analysis of Dasein demands, for its 
part, that it be repeated anew within a framework in which the concept 
of Being is discussed in principle. 

1 ‘Das Sein des Daseins empfängt daher seine-umfassende ontologische Durchsichtigkeit 


erst im Horizont . . .’ In the older editions ‘erst’ appears after ‘daher’ rather than after. 
“Durchsichtigkeit’. 


IV 
TEMPORALITY AND EVERYDAYNESS 334 


q 67. The Basic. Content of Dasein’s Existential Constitution, and a Preliminary 
Sketch of the Temporal Interpretation of it 
Our preparatory analysis! has made accessible a multiplicity of pheno- 
mena; and no matter how much we may concentrate on the foundational 
structural totality of care, these must not be allowed to vanish from our 
phenomenological purview. Far from excluding such a multiplicity, the 
primordial totality of Dasein’s constitution as articulated demands it. The 
primordiality of a state of Being does not coincide with the simplicity and 
uniqueness of an ultimate structural element. The ontological source of 
Dasein’s Being is not ‘inferior’ to what springs from it, but towers above 
it in power from the outset; in the field of ontology, any ‘springing-from’ 
is degeneration. If we penetrate to the ‘source’ ontologically, we do not 
come to things which are ontically obvious for the ‘common understand- 
ing’; but the questionable character of everything obvious opens up for us. 
If we are to bring back into our phenomenological purview the pheno- 
mena at which we have arrived in our preparatory analysis, an allusion 
to the stages through which we have passed must be sufficient. Our 
definition of “care” emerged from our analysis of the disclosedness which 
constitutes the Being of the ‘there’. The clarification of this phenomenon 
signified that we must give a provisional Interpretation of Being-in-the- 
world—the basic state of Dasein. Our investigation set out to describe 
Being-in-the-world, so that from the beginning we could secure an ade- 
quate phenomenological horizon as opposed to those inappropriate and 
mostly inexplicit ways in which the nature of Dasein has been determined 
beforehand ontologically. Being-in-the-world was first characterized with 
regard to the phenomenon of the world. And in our explication this was 
done by characterizing ontico-ontologically what is ready-to-hand and 
, present-at-hand ‘in’ the environment, and then bringing within-the- 
| world-ness into relief, so that by this the phenomenon of worldhood in 
- general could be made visible. But understanding belongs essentially to 


fm 


384 Being and Time II. 4 
disclosedness; and the structure of worldhood, significance, turned out to 
be bound up with that upon which understanding projects itseif—namely 
that potentiality-for-Being for the sake of which Dasein exists. 

The temporal Interpretation of everyday Dasein must start with those 
structures in which disclosedness constitutes itself: understanding, state- 
of-mind, falling, and discourse. The modes in which temporality tem- 
poralizes are to be laid bare with regard to these phenomena, and will 
give us a basis for defining the temporality of Being-in-the-world. This 
ieads us back to the phenomenon of the world, and pcrmits us to delimit 
the specifically temporai problematic of worldhood. This must be con- 
firmed by characterizing that kind. of Being-in-the-world which in an 
everyday manner is closest io us—circumspective, falling concern. The 
temporality of this concern makes it possible for circunispecticn to be 
modified into a perceiving which lcoks at things, and the theoretical 
cognition which is grounded in such perceiving. The temporality of 
Being-in-the-world thus emerges, and it turns out, at the same time, to 
se the foundation for that spatiality wl.ich is specific for Dasein. We must 
aiso show the temporal Constitution of deseverance and directionality. 
Xken as a whole, these analyses will rovial 2 possibility for the temporal- 
izing of temporality in which Dasein’: inauthentictty is ontoloyicaliy 
crounded; and they will lead us face to face with the question of how the 
temporal character of everylayrers-- the temporal meaning of che phrase 
‘proximally and for the mosi part, which we nave been using constantly 
hitherto—is to be understood. Py fixing upor this prehlem we shall have 
niade jt plain that the clarification of this phenomenon which we have so 
ar attained is insufficient, and we sha!l have shown the extent of this 
insufficiency. 

The present chapter is thus divided up as follows: the tempcrality of 
aisclosedness in general (Section 68); the temporality of Beiny-in-the- 
world and the problem of transcendence (Section 69); the temporality 
of the spatiality characteristic of Dasein (Section 70); the temporal 
meaning of Dasein’s everydayness (Section 71). 


S 68. The Temporality of Disclosedness in General 


Resoluteness, which we have characterized with regard to its 
temporal meaning, represents an authentic disclosedness of Ynsein-—a 
disclosedness which constitutes an entity of such a kind that in existing, 
it can be its very ‘there’, Care has been characterized with regard to its 
temporal meaning, but only in its basic features. To exhibit its concrete 
temporal Constitution, means to give a temporal Interpretation of the 
items of itsstructure, taking them each singly : understanding, stat=-of-mind, 


II. 4 Being and Time | 385 
falling, and discourse. Every understanding has its mood. Every state- 
of-mind is one in which one understands. The understanding which 
one has in such a state-of-mind has the character of falling. The under- 
standing which has its mood attuned in falling, Articulates itself with 
relation to its inteiligibility in discourse. The current temporal Constitu- 
tion of these phenomena leads back im each case to that one kind of 
temporality wich serves as such to guarantee the possibility that under- 
standing, state-of-mind, falling, and discourse, are united in their struc- 
ture.! 


(a) The Temporality of Understanding" 

With ihe terın “understanding” we have in mind a fundamental 
existentialz, which is neither a definite species of cognition distinguished, let 
us say, from explaining and conceiving, nor any cognition at all in the 
sense of grasping something thematically. Understanding constitutes 
rather the Being of the ‘‘there’’ in such a way that, on the basis of such 
understanding, a Dasein can, in existing, develop the different possibilities 
of sight, of looking around [Sichumsehens], and of just looking. In all 
explanation one uncovers understandingly that which one cannot under- 
stand; and all explanation is thus rooted in Dasein’s primary understand- 
ing. | 

Ifthe term “understanding” is taken in a way which is primordially 
existential, it means to be projecting? towards a potentiality-for-Being for the 
sake of which any Dasein exists. In understanding, one’s own potentiality- 
for-Being is disclosed in such a way that one’s Dasein always knows 
understandingly what it is capable of. It ‘knows’ this, however, not by 
having discovered some fact, but by maintaining itself in an existentiell 
possibility. The kind of ignorance which corresponds to this, does not 
consist in an absence or cessation of understanding, but must be regarded 
as a deficient mode of the projectedness of one’s potentiality-for-Being. 
Existence can be questionable. If it is to be possible for something ‘to be 
in question’ [das “‘In-Frage-stehen’’}, a disclosedness is needed. When one 
understands oneself projectively in an existentiell possibility, the future 
underlies this understanding, and it does so as a coming-towards-oneself 
out of that current possibility as which one’s Dasein exists. The future 
makes ontologically possible an entity which is in such a way that it 
exists understandingly in its potentiality-for-Being. Projection is basically 
futural; it does not primarily grasp the projected possibility thematically 


1 ‘Die jeweilige zeitliche Konstitution der genannten Phänomene führt je auf die eine 
Zeitlichkeit zurück, als welche sie die mögliche Struktureinheit von Verstehen, Befindlich- 
keit, Verfallen und Rede verbürgt.’ The older editions omit the pronoun ‘sie’. 
| 2° |, entwerfend-sein ...’ The older editions have ‘... entwerfend Sein...’ 


N 


337 


386 ` Being and Time Il. 4 
just by having it in view, but it throws itself into it as a possibility. In 
each case Dasein is understandingly in the way that it can be.? Resolute- 

ness has turned out to be a kind of existing which is primordial and 

authentic. Proximally and for the most part, to be sure, Dasein remains 
irresolute; that is to say, it remains closed off in its ownmost potentiality- | 
inr-Being, to which ‘it brings itself only when it has been individualized. 

This implies that temporality does not temporalize itself constantly out 

of the authentic future. This inconstancy, however, does not mean that 

temporality sometimes lacks a future, but rather that the temporalizing 

of the future takes various forms. 

To designate the authentic future terminologically we have reserved 
the expression “anticipation”. This indicates that Dasein, existing authentic- 


“ally, lets itself come towards itself as its ownmost potentiality-for- 


that the future itself must first win itself, not from a Present, but from the 
inauthentic future. If we are to provide a formally undifferentiated term 
for the future, we may use the one with which we have designated the first. 
structural item of care—the ‘“‘ahead-of-ttself”. Factically, Dasein is 
constantly ahead of itself, but inconstantly anticipatory with regard to its 
existentiell possibility. 

How is the inauthentic future to be contrasted with this? Just as the 
authentic future is revealed in resoluteness, the inauthentic future, as an 
ecstatical mode, can reveal itself only if we go back ontologically from the 
inauthentic understanding of everyday concern to its existential-temporal 
meaning. As care, Dasein is essentially ahead of itself. Proximally and for 
the most part, concernful Being-in-the-world understands itself in terms 
of that with which it is concerned. Inauthentic understanding? projects 
itself upon that with which one can concern oneself, or upon what is 
feasible, urgent, or indispensable in our everyday business. But that with 
which we concern ourselves is as it is for the sake of that potentiality-for- 
Being which cares. This potentiality lets Dasein come towards itself in its 


‘concernful Being-alongside that with which it is concerned: Dasein-does 


not come towards itself primarily in its ownmost non-relational potential- 
ity-for-Being, but it awaits this concernfully in terms of that which yields or: 
denies the object of its concern.* Dasein comes towards itself from that with 
which it concerns itself. The inauthentic future has the character of 
awaiting.* One’s concernful understanding of oneself as they-self in terms 


: ‘Verstehend ist das Dasein j je, wie es sein kann.’ 
% ‘Das uneigentliche Verstehen . . .’ Italics only in the later editions 
3‘... sondern es ist besorgend seiner gewärtig aus dem, was das Besorgts ergibt oder versagt.' 
Iti ia not clear whether ‘das Besorgte’ or ‘was’ is the subject of its clause. 
. des Gewartigens.’ While the verb ‘await’ has many advantages as an approximation 
to en it is a bit too colourless and fails to bring out the important idea of being 
prepared to reckon with that which one awaits. 


Il. 4 Beng and Time dB; 
of what one does, has its possibility ‘based’ upon this ecstatical mode ot 
the future. And only because factical Dasein is thus awaiting its potentiality- 
for-Being, and ts awaiting this potentiality in terms of that with which it 
concerns itself, can it expect anything and wait for it [erwarten und warten 
‘auf. ..]. In each case some sort of awaiting must have disclosed the 
horizon and the range from which something can be expected. Expecting 
ts founded upon awaiting, and is a mode of that future which temporalizes itself 
authentically as anticipation. Hence there lies in anticipation a more pri- 
mordial Being-towards-death than in the concernful expecting of it. 
Understanding, as existing in the potentiality-for-Being, however it 
may have been projected, is primarily futural. But it would not temporalize 
itself if it were not temporal—that is, determined with equal primordiality 
by having been and by the Present. The way in which the latter ecstasis 
helps constitute inauthentic understanding, has already been made plain 
in a rough and ready fashion. Everyday concern understands itself in 
terms of that potentiality-for-Being which confronts it as coming from its 
possible success or failure with regard to whatever its object of concern may 
be. Corresponding to the inauthentic future (awaiting), there is a special 
way of Being-alongside the things with which one concerns oneself. This 
way of Being-alongside is the Present—the ‘‘waiting-towards”’;! this 
ecstatical mode reveals itself if we adduce for comparison this very same 
ecstasis, but in the mode of authentic temporality. To the anticipation 
which goes with resoluteness, there belongs a Present in accordance with 
which a resolution discloses the Situation. In resoluteness, the Present is 
not only brought back from distraction with the objects of one’s closest 
concern, but it gets held in the future and in having been. That Present 
which is held in authentic temporality and which thus is authentic itself, we 
call the “‘moment of vision’’.* This term must be understood in the active 
sense as an ecstasis. It means the resolute rapture with which Dasein is 
carried away to whatever possibilities and circumstances are encountered 
‘ in the Situation as possible objects of concern, but a rapture which is keld 
in resoluteness.? The moment of vision is a phenomenon which in principle 


1 ‘Gegen-wart’. In this context it seems well to translate this expression by a hendiadys 
which, like Heidegger's hyphenation, calls attention to the root-meaning of the noun 
‘Gegenwart’. See our notes 2, p. 47, (H. 25) and 2, p. 48 (H. 26) above. 


* Cf. note 2, p. 376, H. 328 above. 


$‘Er meint die entschlossene, aber in der Erschlossenheit gehaltene Entrückung des 
Daseins an das, was in der Situation an besorgbaren Möglichkeiten, Umständen begegnet.’ 
The verb ‘entriicken’ means literally ‘to move away’ or ‘to carry away’, but it has also 
taken on the meaning of the ‘rapture’ in which one is ‘carried away’ in è more figurative 
sense. While the words ‘Entriickung’ and ‘Ekstase’ can thus be used in many contexts as 
synonyms, for Heidegger the former seems the more general. (See H. 365 below.) We 
shall translate ‘entriicken’ by ‘rapture’ or ‘carry away’, or, as in this case, by a combina- 
tion of these expressions. 


338 


339 


388 Being and Time II. 4 


tan not be clarified in terms of the “now” [dem Jetzt]. The “now” is a 
temporal phenomenon which belongs to time as within-time-ness: the 
“now” ‘in which’ something arises, passes away, or is present-at-hand. 
‘In the moment of vision’ nothing can occur; but as an authentic 
Present or waiting-towards, the moment of vision permits us to encounter 
for the first ime what can be ‘in a time’ as ready-to-hand or present-at- 
hand 14 . = | 

In contradistinction to the moment of vision as the authentic Present, 
we call the inauthentic Present ‘‘making present’. Formally understood, 
every Present is one which rnakes present, but not every Present has the 
character of a ‘moment of vision’. When we use the expression ‘‘making 
present” without adding anything further, we always have in mind the 
inauthentic kind, which is irresolute and does not have the character of 
a moment of vision. Making-present will become clear only in the light of 
the temporal Interpretation of falling into the ‘world’ of one’s. concern; 
such falling has its existential meaning in making present. But in so far as 
the potentiality-for-Being which is projected by inauthentic understanding 
is projected in terms of things with which one can be concerned, this 
means that such understanding temporalizes itself in terms of making 
present. The moment of vision, however, temporalizes itself in quite the 
opposite manner—in terms of the authentic future. 

Inauthentic understanding temporalizes itself as an awaiting which 
makes present [gegenwartigendes Gewartigen]—an awaiting to whose ecsta- 
tical unity there must belong a corresponding “having been”. The authentic 
coming-towards-itself of anticipatory resoluteness is at the same time a 
coming-back to one’s ownmost Self, which has been thrown into its indivi- 
dualization, This ecstasis makes it possible for Dasein to beable to take over 
resolutely that entity which it already is. In anticipating, Dasein brings 
itself again forth into its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. If Being-as-having- 
been is authentic, we call it “repetition”’.* But when one projects oneself 
inauthentically towards those possibilities which have been drawn from 
the object of concern in making it present, this is possible only because 
Dasein has forgotten itself in its ownmost thrown potentiality-for-Being. 
This forgetting is not nothing, nor is it just a failure to remember; it is 
rather a ‘positive’ ecstatical mode of one’s having been—a.mode with 
a character of its own. The ecstasis (rapture) of forgetting has the char- 
acter of backing away in the face of one’s ownmost ‘‘been’”’, and of doing so 
in a manner which is closed off from itself—in such a manner, indeed, that 
this backing-away closes off ecstatically that in the face of which one is 


1 ‘Im Vorlaufen holt sich das Dasein wieder in das eigenste Seinkönnen vor. Das eigent- 
liche Gewesen-sein nennen wir die Wiederholung.’ On ‘Wiederholung’, see H. 385 and our 
note ad loc. 


IL. 4 Being and Time 389 
backing away, and thereby closes itself off too.! Having forgotten [Verges- 
senheif] as an inauthentic way of having been, is thus related to that thrown 
Being which is one’s own; it is the temporal meaning of that Being in 
accordance with which I am proximally and for the most part as-having- 
been, Only on the basis of such forgetting can anything be retained [be- 
halten] by the concernful making-present which awaits; and what are thus 
retained are entities encountered within-the-world with a character other 
than that of Dasein. To such retaining there corresponds a non-retaining 
which presents us with a kind of ‘forgetting’ in a derivative sense. 

Just as expecting is possible only on the basis of awaiting, remembering is 
possible only on that of forgetting, and not vice versa; for in the mode of 
having-forgotten, one’s having been ‘discloses’ primarily the horizon 
into which a Dasein lost in the ‘superficiality’ of its object of concern, can 
bring itself by remembering.* The awaiting which forgets and makes present is 
an ecstatical unity in its own right, in accordance with which inauthentic 
understanding temporalizes itself with regard to its temporality. The 
unity of these ecstases closes off one’s authentic potentiality-for-Being, and 
is thus the existential condition for the possibility of irresoluteness. Though 
inauthentic concernful understanding determines itself in the light of 
making present the object of concern, the temporalizing of the under- 
standing is performed primarily in the future. 


(b) The Temporality of State-of-mind!Y 

Understanding is never free-floating, but always goes with some state- 
of-mind. The “there” gets equiprimordially disclosed by one’s mood in 
every case—or gets closed off by it. Having a mood brings Dasein face to 
facewith its thrownness in such a manner that this thrownness is not known 
as such but disclosed far more primordially in ‘how one is’. Existentially, 
“Being-thrown” means finding oneself in some state-of-mind or other. 
One's state-of-mind is therefore based upou thrownness. My mood 
represents whatever may be the way in which I am primarily the entity 


1 Die Ekstase (Entriickung) des Vergessens hat den Charakter des sich selbst ver- 
schlossenen Ausrückens vor dem eigensten Gewesen, so zwar, dass dieses Ausrücken vor... 
ekstatisch das Wover verschliesst und in eins damit sich selbst.’ Heidegger 1 is here con- 
necting the word “Entrückung’ (our rapture’) with the cognate verb ‘ausriicken’ (‘back 
ee which may be used intransitively in the military sense of ‘decamping’ , but may 

also be used transitively i in the sense of ‘disconnecting’. Both ‘entrücken’ and ‘ausriicken’ 
mean originally ‘to move away’, but they have taken on very different connotations in 
ordinary German usage. 

. denn im Modus der Vergessenheit “ ‘erschliesst”” die Gewesenheit primär den 
Horizont, i in den hinein das an die *Äusserlichkeit’’ des Besorgten verlorene Dasein sich 
erinnern kann.’ Here there is presumably a deliberate contrast between the idea of 
externality in the root meaning of ‘Ausserlichkeit’ {‘ superficiality’ ) and the idea of putting 
oneself info something, which is the original sense of ‘sich erinnern’ (‘to remember’ h We 
have tried to bring bis out by our rather free translation of‘... in den hinein .. . sich 
erinnerh ... .', 


340 


390 Being and Time IT. 4 
that has been thrown. How does the temporal Constitution of having-a- 
mood let itself be made visible? How will the ecstatical unity of one’s 
current temporality give any insight into the existential connection 
between one’s state-of-mind and one’s understanding? 

One’s mood discloses in the manner of turning thither or turning away 
from one’s own Dasein. Bringing Dasein face to face with the “that-it-is” of 
its own thrownness—whether authentically revealing it or inauthentically 
covering it up—becomes existentially possible only if Dasein’s Being, by 
its very meaning, constantly’ ts as having been. The ‘been’ is not what 
first brings one face to face with the thrown entity which one is oneself; 
but the ecstasis of the “been” i is what first makes it possible to find oneself 
in the way of having a state-of-mind.! 

Understanding is grounded primarily in the future: one’s state-of-mind, 
however, temporalizes itself primarily in having been.” Moods temporalize 
themselves—that is, their specific ecstasis belongs to a future and a Present 
in such a way, indeed, that these equiprimordial ecstases are modified by 
having been. 

We have emphasized that while moods, of course, are ontically well- 
known to us [bekannt], they are not recognized [erkannt] in their 
primordial existential function. They are regarded as fleeting Experiences 
which ‘colour’ one’s whole‘ ‘psychical condition’. Anything which is 
observed to have the character of turning up and disappearing in a 
fiecting mannetpabelongs to ‘the primordial constancy of existence. But 
all the same, what should moods have in common with ‘time’ ? That these 
‘Experiences’ come and go, that they run their course ‘in time’, is a trivial 
thing to establish. Certainly, And indeed this can be established in an 
ontico-psychological manner, Our task, however, is to exhibit the onto- 
logical structure of having-a-mood in its existential-temporal Constitution. 
And of course this is proximally just a matter of first making the tempora- 
lity of moods visible. The thesis that ‘one’s state-of-mind is grounded 
primarily in having been’ means that the existentially basic character 
_of moods lies in bringing one back to something. This bringing-back does not 
first produce s having been; butin any state-of-mind some mode of having 
been is made manifest for existential analysis.? So if we are to Interpret 


1 Das Bei orfene Sciende, das man selbst ist, schafft nicht erst das 
Gewesen, a T tase ermöglicht erst das Sich-finden in der Weise des Sich- 
befindens.’ We have construed ‘das Gewesen’ and ‘dessen Ekstase’ as the subjects of their 
respective clauses, but other interpretations are not impossible. 

2 In our italicization we follow the older editions. In the newer editions ‘Gewesenheit’ 
(‘having been’) is not italicized 

3 ‘Dieses stellt die Gewesenheit nicht erst her, sondern die Befindlichkeit offenbart für 
die existenziale Analyse je einen Modus der Gewesenheit.’ The grammar of the first 
clause is ambiguous. 


Il. 4 Being and Time 391 
states-of-mind temporally, our aim is not one of deducing moods from 
temporality and dissolving them into pure phenomena of temporalizing.. 
All we have to do is to demonstrate that except on the basis of temporality, 
_cads are not possible in what they ‘signify’ in an existentiell way or in how 
cw ‘signify’ it. Our temporal Interpretation will restrict itself to the 
„ıwnomena of fear and anxiety, which we have already analysed: in A 
È a manner, 


We shall begin our analysis by exhibiting the temporality of fear.” ER 
has been characterized 4s an*inauthentic state-of-mind. To what extent. 


does the existential meaning which makes such a state-of-mind possible 
lie in what has been? Which thode of this ecstasis designates the specific 
temporality offear? Fear is a fearing in the face of something threatening— 
of something which is detrimental to Dasein’s factical potentiality-for- 
Being, and which brings itself chose in the way we have described, within 
the range of the ready-to-hand and the present-at-hand with which we 
concern ourselves. ‚Fearing discloses something threatening, and it does 
so by way of everyday circumspection. A subject which merely beholds 
would never be able to discover anything of the sort. But if something is 
disclosed when one fears in the face of it, is not this disclosure a letting- 
something-come-towards-oneself [ein Auf-sich-zukommenlassen]? Has 
not “fear” been rightly, defined as “the expectation of some oncoming 
evil” [eines ankommenden Übels] (“malum Futurum”) ' ? Is not the primary 
meaning of fear the future, and least of all, one’s having been? Not only 
does fearing ‘relate’ itself to . ‘something future’ in the signification of 
something which first comes on ‘in time’; but this self-relating i is itself 
futural in the primordially temporal sense. All this is incontestable. 
'Manifestly an awaiting is one-of the things that belong to the existential- 
temporal Constitution of fear. But proximally this just means that the 
temporality of fear is one that is inauthentic. Is fearing in the face of some- 
thing merely an expecting of something threatening which is coming on? 
Such an expectation need not be fear already, and it is so.far from being 
fear that the specific character which fear as a mood possesses is 
missing. This character lies in the fact that in fear the awaiting lets what is 
threatening come back [zurückkommen] to one’s factically concernful 
potentiality-for-Being. Only if that to which this comes back is already 
ecstatically open, can that which threatens be awaited right back to the 
entity which I myself am; only so Can my Dasein be threatened.! The 
awaiting which fears tis. one which is afraid ‘for itself’; that is to 
say, fearing in the face of something, is, in each case a. fearing about; 


1 Zurück auf das Sciende, das ich bin, kann das Bedrohliche nur gewärtigt, und so da, 
Dasein bedroht werden, wenn das Worauf des Zurück auf... schon überhaupt ekstatisch 
offen ist.’ 


341 


392 Being and Time . II. 4 


therein lies the character of fear as mood and as affect, When one’s Being- 
in-the-world has been threatened and it concerns itself with the ready-to- 
hand, it does so as a factical potentiality-for-Being of its own. In the face 
of this potentiality one backs away in bewilderment, and this kind of 
forgetting oneself is what constitutes the existential-temporal meaning of 
fear.) Aristotle rightly defines “fear” as Avmy rıs Ñ) rapayn—as “a kind 
of depression or bewilderment”.¥! This depression forces Dasein back to 
its thrownness, but in such a way that this thrownness gets quite closed off. 
The bewilderment is based upon a forgetting. When one forgets and backs 
away in the face of a factical potentiality-for-Being which is resolute, one 
clings to those possibilities of self-preservation and evasion which one has 
already discovered circumspectively beforehand. When concern is afraid, 
it leaps from next to next, because it forgets itself and therefore does not 
lake hold of any definite possibility. Every ‘possible’ possibility offers itself, 
and this means that the impossible ones do so too. The man who fears, 
does not stop with any of these; his ‘environment’ does not disappear, but 
it is encountered without his knowing his way about in if any, longer.’ 
This bewildered making-present of the first thing that comes into one’s head, 
is something that belongs with forgetting oneself in fear. It is well known, 
for instance, that the inhabitants of a burning house will often ‘save’ the 
most indifferent things that are most closely ready-to-hand. When one has 
forgotten oneself and makes present a jumble of hovering possibilities, one 
thus makes possible that bewilderment which goes to make up the mood- 
character of fear. The having forgotten which goes with such bewilder- 
ment modifies the awaiting too and gives it the character of a depressed 
or bewildered awaiting which is distinct from any pure expectation. 
The specific ecstatical unity which makes it existentially possible to be 
afraid, temporalizes itself primarily out of the kind of forgetting character- 
ized above, which, as a mode of having been, modifies its Present and 
its future in their own temporalizing. The temporality of fear is a forgetting 
which awaits and makes present. The common-sense interpretation of 
fear, taking its orientation from what we encounter within-the-world, 
seeks in the first instance to designate the ‘oncoming evil’ as that 
in the face of which we fear, and, correspondingly, to define our 
relation to this evil as one of “‘expecting”’. Anything else which 


1'Deren existenzial-zeitlicher Sinn wird konstituiert durch ein Sichvergessen: das 
verwirrte Ausrücken vor dem eigenen faktischen Seinkönnen, als welches das bedrohte 
In-der-Welt-sein das Zuhandene besorgt.’ 

2 ‘Bei keiner hält der Fürchtende, die “Umwelt” verschwindet nicht, sondern begegnet 
in einem Sich-nicht-mehr-auskennen in thr.’ 

3 ‘Das selbstvergessene Gegenwärtigen eines Gewirrs von schwebenden Möglichkeiten 
ermöglicht die Verwirrurg, als welche sie den Stimmungscharakter der Furcht ausmacht.’ 
The pronoun ‘sie’ does not appear in the older editions. 


II. 4 Being and Time 393 


belongs to the phenomenon remains a ‘feeling of pleasure or displeasure’. 

How is the temporality of anxiety related *o that of fear ? We have called 
the phenomenon of anxiety a basic state-of-mind.v Anxiety brings 
Dasein face to face with its ownmost Being-thrown and reveals the uncan- 
niness of everyday familiar Being-in-the-wor!d. Anxiety, like fear, has its © 
character formally determined by something ir the face of which one is 
anxious and something about which one is anxious. But our analysis has 
shown that these two phenomena coincide. This es not mean that their 
structural characters are melted away into one another, as if anxiety were 
anxious neither in the face of anything nor about anything. Their coincid- 
ing means rather that the entity by which both these structures a-e filled 
in [das sie erfüllende Seiende] is the same—-namely Dasein. In particular, 
that in the face of which one has anxiety is not encountered as something 
definite with which one can concern oneself; the threatening dees not 
come from what is ready-to-hand or present-at-hand, but rather from the 
fact that neither of these ‘says’ anything any longer. Fuvirenmental! 
entities nv longer have any invoivement. The world in which I exist has 
sunk into insignificance; and the world which is thus disclosed is one in 
which entities can be freed only in the character of having no involvement. 
Anxiety is anxious in the face of the “nothing” of the world; but this does 
not mean that in anxiety we experience something like the absence of 
what is present-at-hand within-the-world. The present-at-hand must be 
encountered in just such a way that it does not have any involvement 
whatsoever, but can show itself in an empty mercilessness. This implies, 
however, that our concernful awaiting finds nothing in terms of which it 
might be able to understand itself; it clutches at the ‘‘nothing’’ of the 
world; but when our understanding has come up against the world, it is 
brought to Being-in-the-world as such through anxiety. Being-in-the 
world, however, is both what anxiety is anxious in-the-face-cf and what 
it is anxious about. To be anxious in-the-face-of . . . does not have the 
character of an expecting or of any kind of awaiting. That in-the-face-of 
which one has anxiety is indeed already ‘there’—namely; Dasein. itself. 
In that case, does not anxiety get constituted by a future? Certainly; 
but not by the inauthentic future of awaiting. 

Anxiety discloses an insignificance of the world; and this insignificance 
reveals the nullity of that with which one can concern oneself—or, in 
other words, the impossibility of projecting oneself upon: a potentiality- 
for-Being which belongs to existence and which is founded primarily 
upon one’s objects of concern, The revealing of this impossibility, however, 
signifies that one is letting the possibility of an authentic potentiality-for- 
Being be lit up. What is the temporal meaning of this revealing? Anxiety | 


394 Being and Tune II. 4- 
is anxious about z2ked Dasein as something that has been-thrown into. 


uncanniness. It } igs one back to the pure “‘that-it-is” of one’s ownmost 
individualized © "wmness 7%" bringing-back has neither the character 
of an EVäsive fc: , ong tor Šat of a remembering. Bust just as little does 


anxiety imply tt: „ne has „izeady taken over one’s existence into one’s. 


yesolution and d: .. so by a repeating. On the contrary, anxiety brings 
one back to one’: "rownness as sähething possible which can be repeated. 
And in this way it -isọ reveals she possibility of an authentic potentiality- 
for-Being—a potentiality wi» must, in repeating, come back to its 
thrown “there”, bui come b:.' 35 something future which comes towards 
[zukünftiges]. Th: character + naming been ts constitutis for the state-of- 
mind of anxiety; and bringing -+ face to face with repeatasiitty is the specific 
ecstatical mode of ikıs character. 

The forgetting which is c2: -:zutive for fear, bewilders Dasein and lets 
it drift back and forth betwee... orldly’ possibilities which it has net seized 
upon, In contrast to this ma!" 7-present which is not held on to, the Pre- 
sent of anxiety is held on to w..... one brings oneself back to one’s ownmost 
thrownness. The existentia) 'rraning of anxiety is such that it cannot lose 
itself in something with witicn it might be concerned. If anything like 
this happens in a similar state-of-mind, this is fear, which the everyday 
understanding confuses with anxiety. But even though the Present of 
anxiety is held on te, it does not as yet have the character of the moment of 
vision, which temporalizes itself in a resolution. Anxiety merely brings 
one into the mood for a posstble resolution. The Present of anxiety holds 
the moment of vision at the ready [auf dem Sprung]; as such a moment it 
itself, and only itself, is possible. 

The temporality of anxiety is peculiar; for anxiety is grounded pri- 
mordially in having been, and only out of this do the future and the Present 
temporalize themselves; in this peculiar temporality is demonstrated the 
possibility of that power which is distinctive for the mood of anxiety. In 
this, Dasein is taken all the way back to its naked uncanniness, and becomes 
fascinated byit.! This fascination, however, not only éakes Dasein back from 
its ‘worldly’ possibilities, but at the same time gives it the possibility of an 
authentic potentiality-for-Being. 

1 ‘An der eigentümlichen Zeitlichkeit der Angst, dass sie ursprünglich in der Gewesen- 
heit gründet und aus ihr erst Zukunft und Gegenwart sich zeitigen, erweist sich die 
Mögichkeit der Mächtigkeit, durch die sich die Stimmung der Angst auszeichnet, In ihr 
ist Dasein völlig auf seine nackte Unheimlichkeit zurückgenommen und von ihr be- 
nommen.’ In these two sentences there are no less than six feminine nouns which might 
serve as the antecedents of the pronouns ‘sie’ and ‘ihr’ in their several appearances. We 
have chosen the interpretation which seems most plausible to us, but others are perhaps 
no less defensible. The etymological! connection between ‘zurückgenommen’ (‘taken ... 


back’) and ‘benommen’ (‘fascinated’). does not show up in the English version; it is 
obviously deliberate, and it gets followed up in the next sentence. 


11.4 Being and Time 395 

Yet neither of these moods, fear and anxiety, ever ‘occurs’ just isolated 
in the ‘stream of Experiences’; each of them determines an understanding 
or determines itself in terms of one.! Fear is occasioned by entities with 
which we concern ourselves environmentally. Anxiety, however, springs 
from Dasein itself. When fear assails us, it does so from what is within- 
the-world. Anxiety arises out of Being-in-the-world as thrown Being- 
towards-death. When understood temporally, this ‘mounting’ of anxiety 
out of Dasein, means that the future and the Present of anxiety temporalize 
themselves out of a primordial Being-as-having-been in the sense of 
bringing us back to repeatability. But anxiety can mount authentically 
only in a Dasein which is resolute. He who is resolute knows no fear; 
but he understands the possibility of anxiety as the possibility of the very 

mood which neither inhibits nor bewilders hinm. Anxiety liberates him 
from possibilities which ‘count for nothing’ [‘‘nichtigen”], and lets him 
become free for those which are authentic. 

Although both fear and anxiety, as modes of state-of-mind, are grounded 
primarily in having been, they each have different sources with regard to 


their own temporalization in the temporality of care. Anxiety springs from ` 


the future of resoluteness, while fear springs from the lost Present, of which 
fear is fearfully apprehensive, so that it falls prey to it more than ever.? 
But may not the thesis of the temporality of moods hold only for those 
phenomena which we have selected for our analysis? How is a temporal 
meaning to be found in the pallid lack of mood which dominates the ‘grey 
everyday’ through and through? And how about the temporality of such 
moods and affects as hope, joy, enthusiasm, gaiety? Not only fear and 
anxiety, but other moods, are founded existentially upon one’s hav- 
ing been; this becomes plain if we merely mention such phenomena as 
satiety, sadness, melancholy, and desperation. Of course these must be 
Interpreted on the broader basis of an existential analytic of Dasein that 
has been well worked out. But even a phenomenon like hope, which seems 
-to be founded wholly upon the future, must be analysed in much the same 
way as fear. Hope has sometimes been characterized as the expectation 
of a bonum futurum, to distinguish it from fear, whjch relates itself to a 
‘malum futurum. But what is decisive for the structure of hope as a pheno- 
menon, is not so much the ‘futural’ character of that fo which it relates itself 
1 ‘Beide Stimmungen, Furcht und Angst, “kommen” jedoch nie nur isoliert “vor” im 
*Erlebnisstrom”, sondern be-stimmen je ein Verstehen, bzw. sich aus einem solchen.’ 
Heidegger writes ‘be-stimmen’ with a hyphen to call attention to the fact that the words 
‘hestimmen (‘determine’) and ‘Stimmung’ (‘mood’) have a common stem. 
% ‘Die Age Eee aus der Zukunft der Entschlossenheit, die Furcht aus der 
verlorenen furchtsam die Furcht befürchtet, um ihr so erst recht zu 


verfallen.’ The era ae of this passage is ambiguous, and would also permit us to write: 
*,.. the lost Present, which is fearfully apprehensive of fear, so that... 


p 


396 E T | Being and Time II. 4 
but rather the: T expstential meaning of hoping itself. Even here its character 
as a mood Hest marily i in hoplüg. as hoping for something for oneself [Für- 
e who hopes takes himself with him into his hope, as it were, 
hin ns k "up against what he hopes for. But this presupposes that 
ne a oo oe at himself. To say that hope brings alleviation 
[erleichtert] from ‘depressing misgivings, means merely that even hope, as 
a state-of-mind, is still related to our burdens, and related in the mode of 
Being-as-having been. Such a mood of elation—or better, one which 
elates—is ontologically possible only if Dasein has an ecstatico-temporal 
relation to the thrown ground of itself. 

Furthermioré, the pallid lack of mood—indifference—which is addicted 
to nothing’ and - has no urge for anything, and which abandons itself to 
whatever the day: may bring, yet in so doing takes everything along with 
it in a certain manner, demonstrates mast penetratingly the power of for-. 
getting in the. everyday mode of that concern which is closest to us. 
Just living‘ along [Das Dahinleben] in a way which ‘lets’ everything ‘he’ 
as it is, is based on forgetting and abandoning oneself to one’s thrownness. 
It has the ecstatical meaning of an inauthentic way of having been. 
Indifference, which can go along with busying oneself head over heels, 
must be sharply distinguished from equanimity. This latter mood springs 
from resoluteness, which, in a moment of vision, looks at! those Situations 
which are possible i in one’s potentiality-for-Being-a-whole as disclosed i in 
our anticipation.of [zum] death. 

Only an entity which, in accordance with the meaning of its Being, finds 
itself in a state-of-mind [sich befindet]—that is to say, an entity, which 
in existing, is as already having been, and which exists in a constant mode 
of what has been—can became. affected. Ontologically such affection 
presupposes: tmaking-present, and indeed in such a manner that in this 
making-present Dasein can be brought back to itself as something that 
has been. It remains a problem in itself to define ontologically the way 
in which the senses can be stimulated or touched in something that merely 
has life, and how and where® the Being of animals, for instance, is con- 
stituted by some kind of ‘time’. a 


(c) The Temporality of Falling’ 

In our temporal Interpretation of understanding and state-of-mind, 
we not only have come up against a primary ecstasis for each of these 
phenomena, but at the same time we have always come up against tem- 
Zap as a whole. Just as BRJSCHLERDIDE is made possible primarily by 


. die eh, ist auf. 
a “.. wie und wo...’ The ees editions have ‘... wie und ob...’ (‘... how and 
whether... Je 


II. 4 Being and Time 397 


the future, and moods are made possible by having been, the third 
constitutive item in the structure of care—namely, falling—has_ its 
existential meaning in the Present. Qur preparatory analysis of falling 
began with an Interpretation of idle talk, curiosity, and ambiguity. 
In the temporal analysis of falling we shall take the same course. But 
we shall restrict our investigation to a consideration of curiosity, for 
here the specific temporality of falling is most easily seen, Our analysis 
of idle talk and ambiguity, however, presupposes our having already 
clarified the temporal Constitution of discourse and of explanation 
(interpretation). 

Curiosity is a distinctive tendency of Dasein’s Being, in accordance with 
which Dasein concerns itself with a potentiality-for-seeing.* Like the 
concept of sight, ‘seeing’ will not be restricted to awareness through ‘the 
eyes of the body’. Awareness in the broader sense lets what is ready-to- 
hand and what is present-at-hand be encountered ‘bodily’ in themselves 
with regard to the way they look. Letting them be thus encountered 1s 
grounded in a Present. This Present gives us in general the ecstatical 
horizon within which entities can have bodily presence. Curiosity, however, 
does not make present the present-at-hand in order to tarry alongside it 
and understand it; it seeks to see only in order to see and to have seen. As 
this making-present which gets entangled in itself, curiosity has an ecstati- 
cal unity with a corresponding future and a corresponding having 
been. The craving for the new! is of course a way of proceeding towards 
something not yet seen, but in such a manner that the making-present 
seeks to extricate itself from awaiting. Curiosity is futural in a way 
which is altogether inauthentic, and in such a manner, moreover, that 
it does not await a possibility, but, in its craving, just desires such a pos- 
sibility as something that is actual. Curiosity gets constituted by a making- 
present which is not held on to, but which, in merely making present, 
thereby seeks constantly to run away from the awaiting in which it 1s 
nevertheless ‘held’, though not held on to.? The Present ‘arises or leaps 
away’ from the awaiting which belongs to it, and it does so in the sense 


1 ‘Die Gier nach dem Neuen .. .’ Here Heidegger calls attention to the etymological 
structure of the word ‘Neugier’ (‘curiosity’). 

2 ‘Die Neugier wird konstituiert durch ein ungehaltenes Gegenwärtigen, das, nur 
gegenwärtigend, damit ständig dem Gewärtigen, darin es doch ungehalten “gehalten” 
ist, zu entlaufen sucht.’ This sentence involves a play on the words ‘Gewärtigen’ and 
‘Gegenwärtigen’, ‘gehalten’ and ‘ungehalten’, which is not easily reproduced. While 
‘ungehalten’ can mean ‘not held on to’ (as we have often translated it), it can also mean 
that one can no longer ‘contain’ oneself, and becomes ‘indignant’ or ‘angry’. In the present 
passage, Heidegger may well have more than one meaning in mind. The point would be 
that in curiosity we are kept (or ‘held’) awaiting something which we ‘make present’ to 
ourselves so vividly that we try to go beyond the mere awaiting of it and become irritated 
or indignant because we are unable to do so. So while we are ‘held’ in our awaiting, we 
do not ‘hold on to it’, 


347 


398 Being and Time II. 4 


of running away from it, as we have just emphasized. But the making- 
present which ‘leaps away’ in curiosity is so little devoted to the ‘thing’ 
it is curious about, that when it obtains sight of anything it already 
looks away to what is coming next. The making-present which ‘arises or 
leaps away’ from the awaiting of a definite possibility which one has 
taken hold of, makes possible ontologically that not-tarrying which is 
distinctive of curiosity. The making-present does not ‘leap away’ from 
the awaiting in such a manner, as it were, that it detaches itself from that 
awaiting and abandons it to itself (if we understand this ontically). This 
‘leaping-away’ is rather an ecstatical modification of awaiting, and of 
such a kind that the awaiting leaps after the making-present.? The awaiting 
gives itself up, as it were; nor does it any longer let any inauthentic 
possibilities of concern come towards it from that with which it concerns 
itself, unless these are possibilities only for a making-present which is 
not held on to. When the awaiting is ecstatically modified by the making- 
present which leaps away, so that it becomes an awaiting which leaps 
after, this modification is the existential-temporal condition for the 
possibility of distraction. 

Through the awaiting which leaps after, on the other hand, the making- 
present is abandoned more and more to itself. It makes present for the 
sake of the Present. It thus entangles itself in itself, so that the distracted 
not-tarrying becomes never-dwelling-anywhere. This latter mode of the 
Present is the counter-phenomenon at the opposite extreme from the 
moment of vision. In never dwelling anywhere, Being-there is everywhere 
and nowhere. The moment of vision, however, brings existence into the 
Situation and discloses the authentic ‘there’. 

The more inauthentically the Present is—that is, the more making- 
present comes towards ‘itself’—the more it flees in the face of a definite 
potentiality-for-Being and closes it off; but in that case, all the less can 
the future come back to the entity which has been thrown. In the ‘leaping- 
away’ of the Present, one also forgets increasingly. The fact that curiosity 
always holds by what is coming next, and has forgotten what has gone 


1 'Die Gegenwart ‘entspringt? dem zugehörigen Gewärtigen in dem betonten Sinne 
des Entlaufens.’ While the verb ‘entspringen’ can mean ‘arise from’ or ‘spring from’, as 
it usually does in this work, it can also mean ‘run away from’ or ‘escape from’, as Heideg- 
ger says it does here. We shall accordingly translate it in this context by the more literal 
‘leap away’ or occasionally by ‘arise or leap away’. The point of this passage will perhaps 
be somewhat plainer if one keeps in mind that when Heidegger speaks of the ‘Present’ 
(‘Gegenwart’) or ‘making-present’ (‘Gegenwiartigen’) as ‘leaping away’, he is using these 
nouns in the more literal sense of ‘waiting towards’. Thus in one’s ‘present’ curiosity, one 
‘leaps away’ from what one has been ‘awaiting’, and does so by ‘waiting for’ something 
different. 

2‘. . . dass dieses dem Gegenwärtigen nachspringt. The idea seems to be that when 
curiosity ‘makes present’ new possibilities, the current awaiting is re-directed towards 
these instead of towards the possibilities which have been awaited hitherto. 


Il. 4 | Being and Time 399 
before,! is not a result that ensues only from curiosity, but is the ontological 
condition for curiosity itself. 

As regards their temporal meaning, the characteristics of falling which 
we have pointed out—temptation, tranquillization, alienation, self- 
entanglement—mean that the making-present which ‘leaps away’ hasan 348 
ecstatical tendency such that it seeks to temporalize itself out of itself. 
When Dasein entangles itself, this has an ecstatical meaning. Of course 
when one speaks of the rapture with which one’s existence is carried away 
in making present, this does not signify that Dasein detaches itself from 
its Self and its “I”. Even when it, makes present in the most extreme -~ | 
manner, it remains temporal—that is, ‚awaiting and forgetful. In making 
present, moreover, Dasein still understands itself, though. it has been ~ 
alienated from its ownmost potentiality-for-Being, which is based primarily... 
on the authentic future and on authentically naving been. But in so far 
as making-present is always offering something ‘new’, it does not let 
Dasein come back to itself and is constantly tranquillizing it anew. This 
tranquillizing, however, strengthens in turn the tendency towards leaping 
away. Curiosity is ‘activated’ not by the endless iniimensity of what we 
have not yet seen, but rather by the falling kind of temporalizing which 
belongs to the Present as it leaps away.” Even if one has seen everything, 
this is precisely when curiosity fabricates something new. 

As a mode of temporalizing, the leaping-away’ of the Present is 
grounded in the essence of temporality, which is jintte. Having been 
thrown into Being-towards-death, Dasein flees—proximally and for the 
most part—in the face of this thrownness, which has been more or less 
explicitly revealed. The Present leaps away from its authentic future 
and from its authentic having been, so that it lets Dasein come to 
its authentic existence only by taking a detour through that Present. 
The ‘leaping-away’ of the Present—that is, the falling into lostness— 
has its source in that primordial authentic temporality itself which makes 
possible thrown Being-towards-death.* 

While Dasein can indeed be brought authentically face to face with its 
thrownness, so as to understand itself in that thrownness authentically, 
nevertheless, this thrownness remains closed off from Dasein as regards 
u ontical “whence” and “how” of it. But the fact that it is thus closed 


. beim Nächsten hält und das Vordem vergessen hat... .’ 

ie die endiose Unübersehbarkeit dessen, was noch nicht gesehen ist, “br kt” 
die Neugier, sondern die verfallende Zeitigungsart der entspringenden Gege sri. 
This sentence is grammatically ambiguous. 

3 ‘Der Ursprung des “Entspringens” der Gegenwart, das heisst des Verfallen:; :':: 
Y-rlotenheilt, ist die ursprüngliche, ‚eigentliche Zeitlichkeit selbst, die das Bewortr: in 
zum Tode erm erm iglicht.’ Our conventions for translating ‘Ursprung’ as ‘source’, "u." . it 
lich’ as “prim ", and ‘entspringen’ as ‘leap away’, conceal Heidegger’s pi. : ir: 
ci the root ‘spring- ' in this passage. 


349 


400 Being and Time IT. 4 


off is by no means just a kind of ignorance factually subsisting; it is con- 
stitutive for Dasein’s facticity. It is also determinative for the ecstaitcal 
character of the way existence has been abandoned to its own null basis. 

Proximally, the “throw” of Dasein’s Being-thrown into the world is one 
that does not authentically get ‘‘caught’’. The ‘movement’ which such a 
“throw” implies does not come to ‘a stop’ because Dasein now ‘is there’. 
Dasein gets dragged along in thrownness; that is to say, as something 
which has been thrown into the world, it loses itself in the ‘world’ in its 
factical submission to that with which it is to concern itself. The Present, 
which makes up the existential meaning of “getting taken along”, never 
arrives at any other ecstatical horizon of its own accoid, unlcss it gets 
brought back from its lostness by a resolution, so that both the current 
Situation and therewith the primordial ‘limit-Situation’ of Being-towards- 
death, will be disclosed as a moment of vision which has been held on to. 


(d) The Temporality of Discourse™! 

When the “there” has been completely disclosed, its disclosedness is 
constituted by understanding state-of-mind, and falling; and this dis- 
clasedness becomes Articulated by discourse. Thus discourse does not 
temporalize itself primarily in any definite ecstasis. F actically, however, 
discourse expresses itself for the most part in language, and speaks proxim- 
ally in the way of addressing itself to the ‘environment’ by talking about 
things concernfully; because of this, making-present has, of course, a 
privileged constitutive function. . | 

Tenses, like the other temporal phenomena of language — ‘aspects’ and 
‘temporal stages’ [‘‘Zeitstufen”]—do not spring from the fact that dis- 
course expresses itself ‘also’ about ‘temporal’ processes, processes encoun- 
tered ‘in time’. Nor does their basis lie in the fact that speaking runs its 
course ‘in a psychical time’. Discourse im itself is temporal, since all 
talking about ..., of ..., or to..., is grounded in the ecstatical unity 
of temporality. Aspects have their roots in the primordial temporality of 
concern, whether or not this concern relates itself to that which is within 
time. The problem of their existential-temporal structure cannot even be 
Jormulated with the help of the ordinary traditional conception of time, to 
which the science of language needs must have recoùrse.* But because in. 
any discourse one is talking about entities, even if not primarily and 
predominanily in the sense of theoretical. assertion, the analysis of the 
temporal Constitution of discourse and the. explication of the temporal 
characteristics of language-patterns can be tackled only if the problem of 
how Being and truth are connected in principle, is broached in the light - 
of the problematic of temporality. We can then define even the ontological 


Il. 4 Being and Time 401 
meaning of the ‘is’, which a superficial theory of propositions and judg- 
ments has deformed to a mere ‘copula’. Only in terms of the temporality 
of discourse—that is, of Dasein in general—can we clarify how ‘significa- 
tion’ ‘arises’ and make the possibility of concept-formation ontologically 
intelligible. 141 

Understanding is grounded primarily in the future (whether in anticipa- 
tion or in awaiting). States-of-mind temporalize themselves primarily ia 
having been (whether in repetition or in having forgotten), Falling has its 
temporal roots primarily in the Present (whether in making-present or in 
the moment of vision). All the same, understanding is in every case a 
Present which ‘is in the process of having been’. All the same, one's 
state-of-mind temporalizes itself as a future which is ‘making present’. 
And all the same, the Present ‘leaps away’ from a future that is in the 
process of having been, or else it is held on to by such a future. Thus we 
can see that in every ecstasis, temporality temporalizes itself as a whole; and this 
means that in the ecstatical unity with which temporality has fully temporalized 
itself currently, is grounded the totality of the structural whole of existence, facticity, 
and falling—that is, the unity of the care-structure. 

Temporalizing does not signify that ecstases come in a ‘succession’. 
The future is not later than having been, and having been is not earlier 
than the Present. Temporality temporalizes itself as a future which makes 
present in the process of having been. 

Both the disclosedness of the “there” and Dasein’s basic existentiell 
possibilities, authenticity and inauthenticity, are founded upon tempora- 
lity. But disclosedness always pertains with equal primordiality to the 
entirety of pel dria «gna Being-in as well as to the world. So if we 
orient ourselves by‘ temporal. Constitution of disclosedness, the onto- 
logical condition for the possibility that there can be entities which exist 
as Being-in-the-world, must be something tl.at may also be ext: wited. 


169. The Temporality of Being-in-the-world and tae Problem of ‘he Transcendence 
of the World | 

The ecstatical unity of temporality—that is, the unity of the ‘ıtside- 
of-itself’ in the raptures of the future, of what has been, and =f the Present 
—is the condition for the possibility that there can be an catity which 
exists as its “there”. The entity which vers the title “Being-ther “is one 
that has been ‘cleared’.*1¥ The Bebt which constitutes this cie2redness 
[Gelichtetheit] of Dasein, is mot = meching ontically presenc-at-band as a 
power or source for a radiant inig >. uccurring in theentit. siuecac ou. 
That by which this entity is css. atiailly cleared-—in other words that 
which makes it both ‘open’ for itself and ‘bright’ for itself—is wha: we 


350 


351 


402 Being and Time Il. 4 


have defined as “‘care’’, in advance of any temporal, Interpretation. In 
care is grounded the full disclosedness of the “there”. amiy by this 
clearedness is any illuminating or illumining, any awareness, ‘seeing’, or 
having of something, made possible. We understand the light of this 
clearedness only if we are not seeking some power implanted in us and 
present-at-hand, but are interrogating the whole constitution. of Dasein’s- 
Being—namely, care—and are interrogating it as to the unitary basis for 
its existential possibility. Zestatical temporality clears the ‘‘there”’ primordtally. 
It is what primarily regulates the possible unity of all Dasein’s existential 
structures. 7 

Only through the fact that Being-there is rooted in temporality can we 
get an insight into the existential possibility of that phenomenon which, at 
the beginning of our analytic of Dasein, we have designated as its basic 
state: Being-in-the-world. We had to assure ourselves in the beginning that 
the structural unity of this phenomenon cannot be torn apart. The 
question of the basis which makes the unity of this articulated structure 
possible, remained in the background. With the aim’ of protecting this 
phenomenon from those tendencies to split it up which were the most 
obvious and therefore the most baleful, we gave a rather thorough Inter- 
pretation of that everyday mode of Being-in-the-world which is closest to 
us—consernfil Being alongside the ready-to-hand within-the-world. Now 
that care itself has been defined ontologically and traced back to tempora- 
lity as its existential ground, concern can in turn be conceived explictily in 
terms of either care or temporality. 

In the first instance our analysis of the temporality of concern sticks to 
the mode of having to do with the ready-to-hand circumspectively. Our 
analysis then pursues the existential-temporal possibility that circum- 
spective concern may be modified into a discovering of entities within- 
the-world in the sense of certain possibilities of scientific research, and 
discovering them ‘merely’ by looking at them. Our Interpretation of the 
temporality of Being alongside what is ready-to-hand and present-at- 
hand within-the-world—Being alongside circumspectively as ..el! as «eth 
theoretical concern—shows us at the same time how this wars sy | 
already the advance condition for that possibility of B= .... „> ante 
in which Being alongside entities within-the-world is grounded. }.°-.* .c 
the temporal Constitution of Being-in-the-world as a theme for anas; ai 
we are led to the following questions: in what way is anything like a world 
possible at all? in what sense is the world? what does the world transcend, 
and how does it do so? how are ‘independent’ l ‘unabhängige”] entities 
within-the-world ‘connected’ [“hängt” ~ » . “zusammen’”’) with the 
transcending world? To expound these questions ontologically is not to- 


1.4 Being and Time 403 


answer them. On the contrary, what such an exposition accomplishes is the 
clarification of those structures with regard to which the problem of trans- 
‘cendence must be raised—a clarification which is necessary beforehand. In 


the existential-temporal Interpretation of Being-in-the-world, three things 


will be considered: (a) the temporality of circumspective concern; (b) the 
temporal meaning of the way in which circumspective concern becomes 
modified into theoretical knowledge of what is present-at-hand within- 
the-world; (c) the temporal problem of the transcendence of the world. 


(a) The Temporality of Circumspective Concern 

How are we to obtain the right point of view for analysing the tempora- 
lity of concern? We have called concernful Being alongside the ‘world’ 
our “dealings in and with the environment’’.*¥ As phenomena which are 
examples of Being alongside, we have chosen the using; manipulation, 
and producing of the ready-to-hand, and the deficient and undiffer- 
entiated modes of these; that is, we have chosen ways of Being alongside 
what belongs to one’s everyday needs.*¥! In this kind of concern Dasein’s 
authentic existence too maintains itself, even when for such existence this 
concern is ‘a matter of indifference’. The ready-to-hand things with 
which we concern ourselves are not the causes of our concern, as if this 
were to arise only by the effects of entities within-the-world. Being along- 
side the ready-to-hand cannot be explained ontically in terms of the 
ready-to-hand itself, nor can the ready-to-hand be derived contrariwise 
from this kind of Being. But neither are concern, as a kind of Being which 
belongs to Dasein, and that with which we concern ourselves, as some- 
thing ready-to-hand within-the-world, just present-at-hand together. All the 
same, a ‘connection’ subsists between them. That which is dealt with, if 
rightly understood, sheds light upon concernful dealings themselves. And 
furthermore, if we miss the phenomenal structure of what is dealt with, 
then we fail to recognize the existential constitution of dealing. Of course 
we have already made an essential gain for the analysis of those entities 
which we encounter as closest to us, -if their specific character as equip- 
ment does not get passed over. But we must understand further that 
concernful dealings never dwell with any individual item of equipment. 
Our using and manipulating of any definite item of equipment still 
remains oriented towards some equipmental context. If, for instance, we 


are searching for some equipment which we have ‘misplaced’, then what : 


we have in mind is not merely what we are searching for, or even primarily 
this; nor do we have it in mind in an isolated ‘act’; but the range of the 
equipmental totality has already been discovered beforehand. Whenever 
we ‘go to work’ and seize hold of something, we do not push out from the 


` 


ho 


- 353 


404 Being and Time ` IT. 4 
“nothing” and come upon some item of equipment which has been pre 
sented to us in isolation; in laying hold of an item of equipment, we come 
back to it from whatever work-world has already been disclosed. 
` The upshot of this is that if in our analysis of dealings we aim at that 
which is dealt with, then one’s existent Being alongside the entities with 
which one concerns oneself must be given an orientation not towards 
some isolated item of equipment which is ready-to-hand, but towards 
the equipmental totality. This way of taking what is dealt with, is forced 
upon us also if we consider that character of Being which belongs dis 
tinctively to equipment that is ready-to-hand—-namely, involvement.” 
We understand the term “involvement” ontologically. The kind of talk in 
which we say that something has with it an involvement in something, i$ 
not meant to establish a fact ontically, but rather to indicate the kind of 
Being that belongs to what is ready-to-hand. The relational character of 
involvement—of its ‘with . . . in . . .—suggests that “‘an’’ equipment ss 
ontologically impossible. Of course just a solitary item of equipment may 
be ready-to-hand while another is missing. But this makes known to w 
that the very thing that is ready-to-hand belongs to something else. Our 
concernful dealings can let what is ready-to-hand be encountered circum: 
spectively only if in these dealings we already understand something like 
the involvement which something has in something. The Being-alongside 
which discovers circumspectively in concern, amounts to letting something 
be involved—that is, to projecting an involvement understandingly. 
Letting things be involved makes up the existential structure of concern. But concern, 
as Being alongside something, belongs to the essential constitution of care; and care, 
in turn, is grounded in temporality. If all this is so, then the existential-condition of 
the possibility of letting things be involved must be sought in a mode of the tem 
poralizing of temporality. | 
Letting something be involved is implied in the simplest handling of an 
item of equipment. That which we let it be involved in [Das Wobei 
desselben] has the character of a ““towards-which”; with regard to this, 
the equipment is either usable or in use. The understanding of the 
“towards-which”’—that is, the understanding of what the equipment is 
involved in—has the temporal structure of awaiting. In awaiting the 
“‘towards-which’’, concern can at the same time come back by itself to the 
sort of thing in which it is involved. The awaiting of what it is involved in, 
and—together with this awaiting—the retaining of that which is thus 
involved, make possible in its ecstatical unity the specifically manipulative 
way in which equipment is made present.' 


1 ‘Das Gewartigen des Wobei in eins mit dem Behalien des Womit der Bewandtnis 


s in seiner ekstatischen Einheit das spezifisch hanticrende Gegenwärtigen de 
Zeugs,’ 


11.4 Being and Time 405 
_ The awaiting of the ‘‘towards-which” is neither a considering of the 
‘goal’ nor an expectation of the impendent finishing of the work to be 
produced. It has by no means the character of getting something themati- 
cally into one’s grasp. Neither does the retaining of that which has an 
involvement signify holding it fast thematically. Manipulative dealings 
no more relate themselves merely to that in which we let something be 
involved, than they do to what is involved itself. Letting something be 
involved is constituted rather in the unity of a retention which awaits, 
and it is constituted in such a manner, indeed, that the making-present 
which arises from this, makes possible the characteristic absorption of 
concern in its equipmental world. When one is wholly devoted to some- 
thing and ‘really’ busies oneself with it, one does not do so just alongside 
the work itself, or alongside the tool, or alongside both of them ‘together’. 
The unity of the relations in which concern circumspectively ‘operates’, 
has been established already by letting-things-be-involved—which is 
based upon temporality. 

- A specific kind of forgetting is essential for the temporality that is con- 
stitutive for letting something be involved. The Self must forget itself iff 
lost in the world of equipment, it is to be able ‘actually’ to go to work and 
manipulate something. But all the same, inasmuch as an awaiting always 
leads the way in the unity of the temporalizing of concern, cuucernful 
Dasein’s own potentiality-for-Being has, a$ we shall show, been given a 
position in care.! 

The making-present which awaits and retains, is constitutive for that 
familiarity in accordance with which Dasein, as Being-with-one-another, 
‘knows its way about’ [sich “‘auskennt’’] in its public environment. Letting 
things be involved is something which we understand existentially as a 
letting-them-‘be’ [ein ““Sein”-lassen]. On such a basis circumspection can 
encounter the ready-to-hand as that entity which it is. Hence we can further 
elucidate the temporalitv of concern by giving heed to those modes of 
circumspectively letting something be encountered which we have 
characterized above®Viil as “conspicuousness”, ‘‘obtrusiveness”’, and 
“obstinacy”. Thematical perception ‘of Things is precisely not the way 
equipment ready-to-hand is encountered in its ‘true “‘in-itself”’’; it is 
encountered rather in the inconspicuousness of what we can come across 
‘obviously’ and ‘Objectively’. But if there is something conspicuous in 
the totality of such entities, this implies that the equipmental totality as 
such is obtruding itself along with it. What sort of existential structure 
must belong to letting things be involved, if such a procedure can let 
something be encountered as conspicuous? This question is now aimed 


1° |. in die Sorge gestellt.’ 


354 


355 


406 N | iw Being and Time IT. 4 


not at those factical occasions which turn cur attention to something 
already presented, but rather at the ontological meaning of the fact that 
it can thus be turned. 

When something cannot be used—when, for instance, a tool definitely 
refuses to work—it can be conspicuous only in and for dealings in which 
something is manipulated. Even by the sharpest and most persevering? 
‘perception’ and ‘representation’ of Things, one can never discover any-* 
thing like the damaging of a tool. If we are to encounter anything un- 
manageable, the handling must be of such a sort that it can be disturbed. 
But what does this signify onéologically? The making-present which awaits 
and retains, gets held up with regard to its absorption in relationships of 
involvement, and it gets held up by what will exhibit itself afterwards as 
damage. The making-present, which awaits the ““towards-which” with 
equal primordiality, is held fast alongside the equipment which has been 
used, and it is held fast in such a manner, indeed, that the ‘“‘towards- 
which” and the “in-order-to” are:now encountered explicitly for the first 
time. On the other hand, the only way in which the making-present itself 


- can meet up with anything unsuitable, is by already operating in guch a 


way as to retain awaitingly that which ‘has an involvement in something. 
To say that making-present gets ‘held up’ is to say that in its unity with 
the awaiting which retains, it diverts itself into itself more and more, and 
is thus constitutive for the ‘inspecting’ [“‘Nachsehen’’], testing, and elimin- 
ating of the disturbance. If concernful dealings were merely a sequence of 
‘Experiences’ running their course ‘in time’, however intimately these 
might be ‘associated’, it would still be ontologically impossible to let any 
conspicuous unusable equipment be encountered. Letting something be 
involved must, as such, be grounded in the ecstatical unity of the making- 
present which awaits and retains, whatever we have made accessible in 
dealing with contexts of equipment.*® 
And how is it possible to ‘ascertain’ what is missing [Fehlendem]—that 
is to say, un-ready-to-hand, not just ready-to-hand in an unmanageable 
way? That which is un-ready-to-hand is discovered circumspectively 
when we miss it [im Vermissen]. The ‘affirmation’ that something is not 
present-at-hand, is founded upon our missing it; and both our missing it 
and our affirmation have their own existential presuppositions. Such 
missing is by no means a not-making-present [Nichtgegenwärtigen]; it is 
1 ‘anhaltendste’. This is the first of several compounds of the verb ‘halten’ (‘to hold’) 
which appear in this and the following paragraphs. Others are ‘behalten’ (‘retain’ in 
the sense of holding in one’s memory), ‘aufbalten’ (‘hold up’ in the sense of delaying or 
bringing to a halt), ‘festhalten’ (‘hold fast’). 
2 ‘Das Bewenden muss als solches, was immer es auch an sa an E 
en 


umganglich zugänglich macht, in der ekstatischen Einheit des gewärtigen-behalten 
Gegenwärtigens gründen.’ 


H. 4- Being and Time 407 
rather a deficient mode of the Present in the sense of the making-unpresent 
[Ungegenwärtigens] of something which one has expected or which one 
has always had at one’s dispos If, when one circum: pectively lets 
something be involved, one were act ‘from the catset au ting the object 
of one’s concern, and if such av... ag did aut tempercize iiself in a 
unity with a making-present, then iva. acoult t „ver And’ tnat something 
is missing |ichlt]. 

On the other hand, when one is makuig present something ready-to- 
hand by awatting, the possibility of one’s ge‘Hng surfrised by something is 
based upon one’s nat awaiting something else which stands in a possible 
context of invoıvement with what one awaits. In the not awaiting of the 
making-present which is lost, the ‘horizoxal’ leeway within which one’s 
Dasein can be assailed by something surprising is first disclosed. 

That with which one’s concernful dealings fall to cope, either by pro- 
ducing or procuring something, or eve,‘ by turning away, holding aloof, 
or protecting oneself from something, reveals iisel! in its insurmountability. 
Concern resigns itself to it.! But resigaing oneself to something is a mode 
peculiar to circumspectively letting it be encountered. On the basis of 
this kind of discovery concern can come across that which is inconvenient, 
disturbing, hindering, endangering, or m general resistant in some way. 
The temporal structure of resigning oneself to something, lies in a non- 
retaining which awaitingly makes present. In awaitingly making present, 
one does not, for instance, reckon ‘on’ that which is unsuitable but none 
the less available. ‘‘Not reckpning with” something, is a mode of “‘taking 
into one’s reckoning” that which one ‘cannot cling to. That which one has 
“not reckoned with” does not get fargotten; it gets retained, so that in 
its very unsuitability it remains ready-to-hand.* That which is ready-to-hand 
in this manner belongs to the everyday stock or content of the factically 
disclosed environment. 

Only in so far as something resistant has been discovered on the basis 
‘of the ecstatical temporality of concern, can factical Dasein understand 
itself in its abandonment to a ‘world’ of whigh it never becomes master. 
Even if concert. remains restricted to the urgency of everyday needs, it is 
never a pure making-present, but arises from a retention which awaits; 
on the basis of such a retention, or as such a ‘basis’, Dasein exists in a 
world. Thus in a certain manner, factically existent Dasein always knows 
its way about, even in a ‘world’ which 1 is alien. 


1 ‘Das Besorgen findet sich damit ab.’ 

2 ‘Die zeitliche Struktur des Sichabfindens liegt in einem gewärtigend-gegenwärtigen- 
den Umbehalten. Das gewärtigende Gegenwärtigen rechnet zum Beispiel nicht “auf” das 
Ungeeignete, aber gleichwohl Verfügbare. Das Nichtrechnen mit . . . ist ein Modus des 
Rechnungtragens enüber, woran man sich nicht halten kann. Es wird nicht 
vergeäsen, sondern behalten, so dass es gerade in seiner Ungeeignetheit zuhanden bleibt.’ 


356 


357 


408 Being and Time Il. 4 


When, in one’s concern, one lets something be involved, one’s doing so 
is founded on temporality, and amounts to an altogether pre-ontologica! 
and non-thematic way of understanding involvement and readiness-to- 
hand. In what follows, it will be shown to what extent the understanding 
of these types of Being as such is, in the end, also founded on temporality. 
We must first give a more concrete demonstration of the temporality of 
Being-in-the-world. With this as our aim, we shall trace how the theoretical 
attitude towards the ‘world’ ‘arises’ cut of circumspective concern with 
the ready-to-hand. Not only the circumspective discovering of entities 
within-the-world but also the theoretical discovering of them is founded 
upon Being-in-the-world. The existential-temporal Interpretation ofthese 
ways of discovering is preparatory to the temporal characterization of 
this basic state of Dasein. 


(b) The Temporal Meaning of the Way in which Circumspective Concern becomes 
Modified into the Theoretical Discovery of the Present-at-hand Within-the-worid 

When in the course of extstential ontological analysis we ask how theoretical 
discovery ‘arises’ out of crrcumspestive concern, this implies already that we 
are not making a problem cf the ontical hister and onen of 
science, or of the faciical eccasicns for it, or of ifs proximate goals. m 
seeking the cntological genesis of the theoretical atutude, we am askiog 
which of those conditions implied in Dasein’s state of Being are exi:- 
tentially necessary for the possibility of Dasein’s exisiing in the way of 
scientific research. This formulation of the question is zimed at an exis- 
tential conception of science. This must be distinguished from the ‘logica? 
conception which understands science with regard to its results and defines 
it as “something established on an interconnection of true propositions—. 
that is, propositions counted as valid’. The existential conception under- 
stands science as a way of existence and thus as a mode of Being-in-the- 
world, which discovers or discloses either entities or Being. Yet a fully 
adequate existential Interpretation of science cannot be carried out until 
the meaning of Being and the ‘connection’ between Being and truth” have been 
clarified in terms of the temporality of existence. The following delibera- 
tions are preparatory to the understanding of this central problematic, within 
which, moreover, the idea of phenomenology, as distinguished from the 
preliminary conception of it which we indicated by way of introduction** 
will be developed for the first time. 

Corresponding to the stage of our study at which we have now arrived, 
a further restriction will be imposed upon our Interpretation of the cheo- 
retical attitude. We shall investigate only the way in which circumspective 


1 The italics in this and the following sentence appear only in the later editions. 


II. 4 Being and Time 409 
concern with the ready-to-hand changes over into an exploration of 
what we come across as present-at-hand within-the-world; and we shall 
be guided by the aim of penetrating to the temporal Constitution of 
Being-in-the-world in general. 

In charactcrizing the change-over from the manipulating and using and 
so forth which are circumspective in a ‘practical’ way, to ‘theoretical’ 
exploration, it would be easy to suggest that merely looking at entities is 
something which emerges when concern holds back from any kind of mani- 
pulation, What is decisive in the ‘emergence’ of the theoretical attitude 
wouid then lie in the disappearance of praxis. So if one posits ‘practical’ 
comcezn as the primary and predominant kind of Being which factical 
Daxin possesses, the ontological possibility of ‘theory’ will be due to the 
«bsence of praxis—that is, to a privation. But the discontinuance of a specific 
manipuletion in our concernful dealings does not simply leave the guiding 
circumspection behfgd as a remainder. Rather, our concern then diverts 
itself specifically inte a just-looking-around [ein Nur-sich-umschen]. But 
this is by no means the way in which the ‘theoretical’ attitude of science 
is reas. ied, On tke contrary, the tarrying which is discontinued when one 
maniy-ulates, can take on the chara ter ofa more precise kind of circum- 
specien, tuch as ‘inspecting’, checking up on what has beer: attained, or 
iwc a aver the ‘operations’ !Betrizio”’} which are now ‘at a standstill’, 
Ki Mics back from the vse of equipment is so far from shcer ‘theory’ that 
the kina of cirerraspection which tarries and ‘considers’, remains wholly 
in the grip of the ready-to-hand equipment with which one is concerned. 
‘Practical’ dealings have their own ways of tarzying. And just as praxis has 
its owr specific kind of sight (‘the y’), theo: stical research is not without 
a praxis of its own. Reading off the measurements which result from an 
experiment often requires a complicated ‘technical’ zet-up for the experi- 
menta! design. Observation with a microscope is dependent upon the 
production of ‘preparations’. Archaeological excavation, which precedes 
any Interpretation of the ‘findings’, demands manipulations of the grossest 
kind. Bu. even in the ‘most abstract’ way of working out problems and 
establishing what has been obtained, one manipulates equipment for 
writing, for example. However ‘uninteresting’ and ‘obvious’ such com- 
ponents of scientific research may be, they are by no means a matter of 
indifference ontologically. The explicit suggestion that scientific behaviour 
as a way of Being-in-the-world, is not just a ‘purely intellectual activity’, 
may seem petty and superfluous. If only it were not plain from this 
triviality that it is by no means patent where the ontological boundary 
between ‘theoretical’ and ‘atheoretical’ behaviour really runs! 

Someone will hold that all manipulation in the sciences is merely in the 


358 


359 


410 Being and Time II. 4 


service of pure observation—the investigative discovery and disclosure of » 
the ‘things themselves’, ‘Seeing’, taken in the widest sense, regulates all 
‘procedures’ and retains its priority. ‘To whatever kind of objects one’s 
xnowietr: 7229 relate itself, and by whatever means it may do 80, still 
the. sarong” which it relates itself to then. immediately, and which all, 
thinking 27 y means has as its goal (author's italics) is intuition’ The ides 
Of Sie An Shes guided all Interpretatiun <. knowledge from the begin- 
nings of Greek ontology until today, whez:-r or not that intuitus can be 


factically reached. If we are to exhibit the ¢..stential genesis of science in 


accordance with the priority of ‘seeing’, we must set out by characterizing. 
the circumspection which is the guide for ‘practical’ concern. 

Circumspection operates in the involvement-relationships of the context 
of equipraent which is ready-to-hand. Moreover, it is subordinate to the 
guidance of a more or less explicit survey of the equipmental totality of 
the current equipment-world and of the public environment which belongs 
to it. This survey is not Just one in which things that are present-at-hand 
are subsequently scraped together. What is essential to it is that one should 
have a primary understanding of the totality of involvements within which 
factical concern always takes its start. Such a survey illumines one’s 
concern, and receives its ‘light’ from tHåt potentiality-for-Being on the 
part of Dasein for the sake of which concern exists as care. In one’s current .. 
using and manipulating, the concernful circumspection which does this 
‘surveying’, brings the ready-to-hand ¢loser to Dasein, and does so by 
interpreting what has been sighted. This specific way of bringing the 
object of concern close by interpreting it circumspectively, we call 
“deliberating” [Überlegung]. The scheme peculiar to this is the ‘if—then’; 
if this or that, for instance, is to be produced, put to use, or averted, then 
some ways and means, circumstances, or opportunities will be needed. 
Circumspective deliberation illumines Dasein’s current factical situation 
in the environment with which it concerns itself. Accordingly, such 
deliberation never merely ‘affirms’ that some entity is present-at-hand or 
has such and such properties. Moreover, deliberation can be performed 
even when that which is brought close in it circumspectively is not 
palpably ready-to-hand and does not have presence within the closest 
range. Bringing the environment closer in ee deliberation has, 
the existential meaning of a making present; for envisaging? is only a me of 
this. In envisaging, one’s deliberation catches sight directly of that which 
is needed but which is un-ready-to-hand. Circumspection which envisages 
does not relate itself to ‘mere representations’. 


1 Here the familiar noun ‘Vergegenwärtigung’ (‘envisaging’) i is printed with the first 
syllable in italics to draw attention to its connection with the special phenomenological 
verb ‘Gegenwartigen’ (‘making present’). 


" 


Id 4 Being and Time 411 

Circumspective making-present, however, is a phenomenon with more 
than one kind of foundation. In the first instance, it always belongs to a 
full ecstatical unity of temporality. It is grounded in a retention of that 
context of equipment with which Dasein concerns itself in awajting a pos- 
siLility. That which has already been laid open in awaiting and retaining 
is brought closer by one’s deliberative making-present or envisaging.! 
But if deliberation is to be able to operate in the scheme of the ‘if—then’, 
concern must already have ‘surveyed’ a context of involvements and have 
an understanding of it. That which is considered with an ‘if’ must already 
be understood as something or other. This does not require that the under- 
standing of equipment be expressed in a predication. The schema ‘some- 
thing as something’ has already been sketched out beforehand in the 
structure of one’s pre-predicative understanding. The as-structure is 
grounded ontologically in the temporality of understanding. But on the 
other hand, only to the extent that Dasein, in awaiting some possibility 
(here this means a ‘“‘towards-which’’), has come back to a “‘towards-this”’ 
(that is to say that it retains something ready-to-hand)—only to this 
extent can the making-present which belongs to this awaiting and retain- 
ing, start with what is thus retained, and bring it, in its character of having 
been assigned or referred to its “towards-which’”’, explicitly closer. The 
deliberation which brings it close must, in the schema of making present, 
be in conformity with the kind of Being that belongs to what is to be 
brought close. The involvement-character of the ready-to-hand does not 
first get discovered by deliberation, but only gets brought close by it in 
such a manner as to let that in which somggthing has an involvement, be 
seen circumspectively as this very thing. 

The way the Present is rooted in the future and in having been, is the 
existential-temporal condition for the possibility that what has been 
projected in circumspective understanding can be brought closer in a 
making-present, and in such a way that the Present can thus conform 
itself to what is encountered within the horizon of awaiting and retaining; 
this means that it must interpret itself in the schema of the as-structure. 
We have thus answered the question we formulated earlier—the question 
of whether the as-structure has some existential-ontological connection 
with the phenomenon of projection. Like understanding and interpretation 
in general, the ‘as’ is grounded in the ecstatico-horizonal unity of temporality. In 
‘our fundamental analysis of Being, and of course in connection with the 
_ Interpretation of the ‘is’ (which, as a copula, gives ‘expression’ to 
the addressing of something as something), we must again make the 


1'Das im gewärtigender- Behalten schon Aufgeschlossene bringt die überlegende 
Gegenwärtigung bzw. Vergegenwärtigung näher.’ 


360. 


363 


412 Being and Time II. 4 


phenomenon of the ‘as’? a theme and delimit the conception of this' 
‘schema’ existentially. 

The question of the genesis of theoretical behaviour is one which we have 
left hangiug. What can a temporal characterization of circumspective 
deliberation and its schemata contribute to the answering of it? Only, 
that this elucidates the Situation in which circumspective concern changes 
over into theoretical discovering—a Situation of the kind which belongs 
to Dasein. We may then try to analyse this change-over itself by taking 
as our clue an elementary assertion which is circumspectively deliberative 
in character and the modifications which are possible for it. 

When we are using a tool circumspectively, we can say, for instance, 
that the hammer is too heavy or too light. Even the proposition that the 
hammer is heavy can give expression to a concernful deliberation, and 
signify that the hammer is not an easy one—in other words, that it takes 
force to handle it, or that it will be hard to manipulate.* But this pro- 
position can also ınean that the entity before us, which we already know 
vircumspectively as a hammer, has a weight—that is to say, it has the 
‘property’ of heaviness: it exerts a pressure on what lies beneath it, and 
it falls :f this is removed. When this kind of talk is so understood, it is no 
longer spoken within the horizon of awaiting and retaining an equipmental 
totality and its involvement-relationships. What is said has been drawn 
from looking at what is suitable for an entity with ‘mass’. We have now 
sighted something that is suitable for the hammer, not as a tool, but as a 
corporeal Thing subject to the law of gravity. To talk circumspectively of 
‘too heavy’ or ‘too light’ no longer has any ‘meaning’; that is to say, the 
entity in itself, as we now encounter it, gives us nothing with relation to 
which it could be ‘found’ too heavy or too light. 

Why is it that what we are talking about—the heavy hammer—shows 
itself differently when our way of talking is thus modified? Not because 
we are keeping our distance from manipulation, nor because we are just 
looking away [abschen] from the equipmental character of this entity, 
but rather because we are looking at [ansehen] the ready-to-hand thing 
which we encounter, and looking at it ‘in a new way’ as something present- 
at-hand. The understanding of Being by which our concernful dealings with 
entities within-the-world have been guided has changed over. But if, instead 
of deliberating circumspectively about something ready-to-hand, we ‘take’ 
it as something present-at-hand, has a scientific attitude thus constituted 


1‘Auch der Satz: der Hammer ist schwer, kann einer besorgenden Überlegung 
Ausdruck geben und bedeuten: er ist nicht leicht, das heisst, er fordert zur Handhabung 
Kraft, bzw. er wird die Hantierung erschweren.’ Here Heidegger is exploiting the double 
meaning of tec German pair of adjectives, ‘schwer’ and leicht, which may correspond 
either to the English pair ‘heavy’ and ‘light’, or to the pair ‘difficult’ and ‘easy’. 


Il. 4 Being and Time 413 
itself? Moreover, even that (JMich is ready-to-hand can be made a theme 
for scientific investigation and determination, for instance when one 
studies someone’s environment—his mtlieu—in the context of a historio- 
logical biography. The context of equipment that is ready-to-hand in an 
everyday manner, its historical emergence and utilization, and its factical 
role in Dasein—all these are objects for the science of economics. The 
ready-to-hand can become the ‘Object’ of a science without having to 
lose its character as equipment. A modification of our understanding of 
Being does not seem to be necessarily constitutive for the genesis of the 
theoretical attitude ‘towards Things’. Certainly not, if this “modification” 
is to imply a change in the kind of Being which, in understanding the 
entity before us, we understand it-to possess. 

In our first description of the genesis of the theoretical attitude out of 
circumspection, we have made basic a way of theoretically grasping entities 
within-the-world—physical Nature—in which the modification of our 
understanding of Being is tantamount to a change-over. In the ‘physical’ 
assertion that ‘the hammer is heavy’ we overlook not only the tool-character 
of the entity we encounter, but also something that belongs to any ready- 
to-hand equipment: its place. Its place becomes a matter of indifference. 
This does not mean that what is present-at-hand loses its ‘location’ alto- 
gether. But its place becomes a spatio-temporal position, a ‘world-point’, 
which is in no way distinguished from any other. This implies not only 
that the multiplicity of places of equipment ready-to-hand within the 
confines of the environment becomes modified to a pure multiplicity of 
positions, but that the entities of the environment are altogether released 
from such’ confinement [entschrdnkit]. The aggregate of the present-at-hand 
becomes the theme. 

In the case before us, the releasing from such environmental confine- 
ment belongs to the way one’s understanding of Being has been modified ; 
and it becomes at the same time a delimitation of the ‘realm’ of the present- 
at-hand, if one now takes as one’s guiding clue the understanding of Being 
in the sense of presence-at-hand. The more appropriately the Being of the 
entities to be explored is understood under the guidance of an under- 
standing of Being, and the more the totality of entities has been Articulated 
in its basic attributes as a possible area of subject-matter for a science, all 
the more secure will be the perspective for one’s methodical inquiry. 

The classical example for the historical development of a science and 
even for its ontological genesis, is the rise of mathematical physics. What is 
decisive for its development does not lie in its rather high esteem for the 
observation of ‘facts’, nor in its ‘application’ of mathematics in determining 
the character of natural processes; it lies rather in the way in which Nature 


362 


363 


414 Being and Time IT. 4 

herself is mathematically projected. In this projection something constantly 

present-at-hand (matter) is uncovered beforehand, and the horizon is 

opened so that one may be guided by looking at those constitutive items 

in it which are quantitatively determinable (motion, force, location, and 

time). Only ‘in the light’ of a Nature which has been projected in this 

fashion can anything like a ‘fact’ be found and set up for an experiment, 
regulated and delimited in terms of ths projection. The ‘grounding’ of 
‘factual science’ was possible only because the researchers understood that 

in principle there are no ‘bare facts’. In the mathematical projection of 
Nature, moreover, what is decisive is not primarily the mathematical as 

such; what is decisive is that this projection discloses something that is a 

priori. Thus the paradigmatic character of mathematical natural science 

does not lie in its exactitude or in the fact that it is binding for ‘Every- 

man’; it consists rather in the fact that the entities which it takes as its 

theme are discovered in it in the only way in which entities can be dis- 

covered—by the prior projection of their state of Being. When the basic 

concepts of that understanding of Being by which we are guided have 

been worked out, the clues of its methods, the structure of its way of 
conceiving things, the possibility of truth and certainty which belongs to 

it, the ways in which things get grounded or proved, the mode in which it 

is binding for us, and the way it is con.municated—all these will be 

Determined. The totality of these items constitutes the full existential 

conception of science. 

The scientific projection of any entities which we have somehow en- 
countered already lets their kind of Being be understood explicitly and 
in such a manner that it thus becomes manifest what ways are possible 
for the pure discovery of entities within-the-world. The Articulation of 
the understanding of Being, the delimitation of an area of subject-matter 
(a delimitation guided by this understanding), and the sketching-out of 
the way of conceiving which is appropriate to such entities—all these 
belong to the totality of this projecting; and this totality is what we call 
““thematizing’’. Its aim is to free the entities we encounter within-the-world, 
and to free them in such a way that they can ‘throw themselves against’! 
a pure discovering—that is, that they can become “Objects”. Thematizing 
Objectifies. It does not first ‘posit’ the entities, but frees them so that one 
can interrogate them and determine their character ‘Objectively’. Being 
which Objectifies and which is alongside the present-at-hand within-the 
world, is characterized by a distinctive kind of making-present.x*!i This 
making-present is distinguished from the Present of circumspection in that 


11“ 


entgegenwerfen” ’. ’. Heidegger is here calling attention to the fact that the word 
‘object’ literally means ‘something thrown against’. 


II. 4 Being and Time 415 


„above all—the kind of discovering which belongs to the science in 


question awaits solely the discoveredness of the present-at-hand. This 
awaiting of discoveredness has its existentiell basis in a resoluteness by 
which Dasein projects itself towards its potentiality-for-Being in the ‘truth’. 
This projection is possible because Being-in-tne-truth makes up a definite 
way in which Dasein may exist. We shall not trace further how science has 
its source in authentic existence. It is enough now if we understand that 
the thematizing of entities within-the-world presupposes Being-in-the- 
world as the basic state of Dasein, and if we understand how it does so. 

If the thematizing of the present-at-hand—the scientific projection of 
Nature—is to become possible, Dasein must transcend the entities thematized. 
Transcendence does not consist in Objectifying, but is presupposed by it. 
If, however, the thematizing of the present-at-hand within-the-world is 
a change-over from the concern which discovers by circumspection, then 
one’s ‘practical’ Being alongside the ready-to-hand is something which a 
transcendence of Dasein must already underlie. 

If, moreover, thematizing modifies and Articulates the understanding of 
Being, then, in so far as Dasein, the entity which thematizes, exists, it must 
already understand something like Being. Such understanding of Being 
can remain neutral. In that case readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand 
have not yet been distinguished; still less have they been conceived 
ontologically. But if Dasein is to be able to have any dealings with a 
context of equipment, it must understand something like an involvement, 
even if it does not do so thematically: a world must have been disclosed to it. 
With Dasein’s factical existence, this world has been disclosed, if Dasein 
indeed exists essentially as Being-in-the-world.! And if Dasein’s Being is 
completely grounded in temporality,. then temporality must make 
possible Being-in-the-world and therewith Dasein’s transcendence; this 
transcendence in turn provides the support for concernful Being alongside 
entities within-the-world, whether this Being is theoretical or practical. 


(c) The Temporal Problem of the Transcendence of the World 


Circumspective concern includes the understanding of a totality of in- 
volvements, and this understanding is based upon a prior understanding 
ofthe relationships of the “‘in-order-to’’, the ““towards-which”’, the “‘towards- 
this”, and the ‘‘for-the-sake-of”’. The interconnection of these relationships 
has been exhibited earlier**!¥ as “‘significance’’. Their unity makes up what 
we call the “world”. The question arises of how anything like the world 
in its unity with Dasein is ontologically possible. In what way must the 
world be, if Dasein is to be able to exist as Being-in-the-World ? 


1 In the older editions this sentence is introduced by ‘Und’ (‘And’). 


364 


365 


416 Being and Time Il. 4 


Dasein exists‘for the sake of a potentiality-for-Being of itself. In existing, 
it has been thrown; and as something thrown, it-has been delivered over to 
entities which it needs in order to be able to be as it is—namely, for the sake 
of itself. In so far as Dasein exists factically, it understands itself in the 
way its “for-the-sake-of-itself”’ is thus connected with some current “‘in- 
order-to”. That inside which existing Dasein understands itself, is ‘there’ 
along with its factical existence. That inside which one primarily under- 
stands oneself has Dasein’s kind of Being. Dasein ts its world existingly. 

We have defined Dasein’s Being as “care”. The ontological meaning of 
“care” is temporality. We have shown that temporality constitutes the 
disclosedness of the “there”, and we have shown how it does so. In 
the disclosedness of the “there” the world is disclosed along with it. The 
unity of significance—that is, the ontological constitution of the world— 
must then likewise be grounded in temporality. The existential-temporal 
condition for the possibility of the world lies in the fact that temporality, as an 
ecstatical unity, has something like a horizon. Ecstases are not simply raptures 
in which one gets carried away. Rather, there belongs to each ecstasis a 
‘whither’ to which one is carried away.! This ‘“‘whither’’ of the ecstasis 
we call the “‘horizonal schema”. In each of the three ecstases the ecstatical 
horizon is different. The schema in which Dasein comes towards itself 
futurally, whether authentically or inauthentically, is the ‘‘for-the-sake-of- 
itself”. The schema in which Dasein is disclosed to itself in a state-of-mind 
as thrown, is to be taken as that in the face of which it has been thrown 
and that fo which it has been abandoned. This characterizes the horizonal 
schema of what has been. In existing for the sake of itself in abandonment 
to itself as something that has been thrown, Dasein, as Being-alongside, 
is at the same time making present. The horizonal schema for the Present 
is defined by the “in-order-to”. 

The unity of the horizonal schemata of future, Present, and having 
been, is grounded in the ecstatical unity of temporality, The horizon of 
temporality as a whole determines that whereupon [woraufhin] factically 
existing entities are essentially disclosed. With one’s factical Being-there, a 
potentiality-for-Being is in each case projected in the horizon of the 
future, one’s ‘Being-already’ is disclosed in the horizon of having been, 
and that with which one concerns oneself is discovered in the horizon of 
the Present. The horizonal unity of the schemata of these ecstases makes 
possible the primordial way in which the relationships of the “in-order- 
to” are connected with the “‘for-the-sake-of”’, This implies that on the 
basis of the horizonal constitution of the ecstatical unity of temporality, 


_ 1 *Die Ekstasen sind nicht einfach Entrückungen zu . . . Vielmehr gehört zur Ekstase 
ein “Wohin” der Entrückung.’ 


Il. 4 Being and Time l 417 
there belongs to that entity which is in each case its own “there”, some- 
thing like a world that has been disclosed. 

Just as the Present arises in the unity of the temporalizing of temporality 
out of the future and having been, the horizon of a Present temporalizes 
itself equiprimordially with.those of the future and of having been. In so 
far as Dasein temporalizes itself, a world is too. In temporalizing itself 
with regard to its Being as temporality, Dascin ts! essentially ‘in a world’, 
by reason of the ecstatico-horizonal constitution of that temporality. The 
world is neither present-at- -hand nor ready-to-hand, but temporalizes 
itself in temporality. It ‘is’, with the “outside-of-itself”” of the ecstases, 
‘there’. If no Dasein exists, no world is ‘there’ either. 

The world is already presupposed in one’s Being alongside the ready-to- 
hand concernfully and factically, in one’s thematizing of the present-at- 
hand, and in one’s discovering of this latter entity by Objectification; that 
is to say, all these are possible only as ways of Being-in-the-world. Having 
its ground [gründend] in the horizonal unity of ecstatical temporality, the 
world is transcendent. It must al:cady have been ecstatically disclosed so 
that in terms of it entities within-the-world can be encountered. Tempora- 
lity already maintains itself ecstatically within the horizons of its ecstases; 
and in temporalizing itself, it comes back to those entities which are 
encountered in the “there”. With Dasein’s factical existence, entities 
within-the-world are already encountered too. The fact that such entities 
are discovered along with Dasein’s own “‘there” of existence, is not left 
to Dasein’s discretion. Only what it discovers and discloses on occasion, in 
what direction it does so, how and how far it does so—only these are 
matters for Dasein’s freedom, even if always within the limitations of its 
thrownness. 

Thus the significance-relationships which determine the structure of the 
world are not a network of forms which a worldless subject has laid over 
some kind of material. What is rather the case is that factical Dasein, 
understanding itself and its world ecstatically in the unity of the ‘‘there’’, 
comes back from these horizons to the entities encountered within them. 
Coming back to these entities understandingly is the existential meaning 
of letting them be encountered by making them present; that is why we 
call them entities “within-the-world”. The world is, as it were, already 
‘further outside’ than any Object can ever be. The: ‘problem of trans- 
cendence’ cannot be brought round to the question of how a subject comes 
out to an Object, where the aggregate of Objects is identified with the idea 


of the world. Rather we must ask: what makes it ontologically possible: 


for entities to be encountered within-the-world and Objectified as so 
1 [talics supplied in later editions only. 


367 


418 Being and Time IT. 4 


encountered ? This can be answered by recourse to the transcendence of 
the world—a transcendence with an ecstatico-horizonal foundation. 

If the ‘subject’ geis conceived or tologically as an existing Dasein w'i.,se 
Being is zround: © e 2 2.22% b- cken one must say that the ws. i 
‘subjective’. But in that casc, uas “su! jective’ world, as one that is teinpor- 
ally transcendent, is ‘more Objective’ than any possible ‘Object’. 

When Being-in-the-world is traced back to the ecstatico-horizonal 
anity of temporality, the existential-ontological possibility of this basic 


tate of . sera is mu e iotelipgible. At the same time it becomes plain 


hat a coco evas: ype cf the world-structurs in goneral and its 
sossible se caions es. ne cki only if the ontology cf possible entities 
sithin-thr- we id as siieated = .. ely enough by clarifying the icza of 
3eing in gen ol. if an intero ..ction of this idea is to he possible, the 


emporality oi Dascin must be exhibited beforehand; here our charac- 
erization of Being-in-the-wor!d will be of servic>. 


1 70. The Temporality of the Spatiality that is Charucieristie of Dasein 

Though the expression ‘temporality’ does not signify what one under- 
stands by “time” when one talks about ‘space and time’, nevertheless 
spatiality seems to make up another basic attribute of Dasein correspond- 
ing to temporality. Thus with Dasein’s spatiality, existential-temporal 
analysis seems to come to a limit, so that this entity which we call 
“Dasein”, must be considered as ‘temporal’ ‘and also’ as spatial co- 
ordinately. Has our existential-temporal analysis of Dasein thus been 
brought to a halt by that phenomenon with which we have become 
acquainted as the spatiality that is characteristic of Dasein, and which 
we have pointed out as belonging to Being-in-the-world ?**v 

If in the course of our existential Interpretation we were to talk 
about Dasein’s having a ‘spatio-temporal’ character, we could not mean 
that this entity is present-at-hand ‘in space and also in time’; this needs 
no further discussion. Temporality is the meaning of the Being of care. 
Dasein’s constitution and its ways to be are possible ontologically only on 
the basis of temporality, regardless of whether this entity occurs ‘in time’ 
or not. Hence Dasein’s specific spatiality must be grounded in temporality. 
On the other hand, the demonstration that this spatiality is existentially 
possible only through temporality, cannot aim either at deducing space 
from time or at dissolving it into pure time. If Dasein’s spatiality 1s 
‘embraced’ by temporality in the sense of being existentially founded upon 
it, then this connection between them (which is to be clarified in what 
follows) is also different from the priority of time over space in Kant’s 
sense. To say that our empirical representations of what is present-at-hand 


Il. 4 Being and Time 419 
‘in space’ run their course ‘in time’ as psychical occurrences, so that 
the ‘physical’ occurs mediately ‘in time’ also, is not to give an existential- 
ontological Interpretation of space as a form of intuition, but rather to 
establish ontically that what is psychically present-at-hand runs its 
course ‘in time’, 

We must now make an existential-analytical inquiry as to the temporal 
conditions, for the possibility of the spatiality that is characteristic of 
Dasein—the spatiality upon which in turn is founded the uncovering of 
space within-the-world. We must first remember in what way Dasein is 
spatial. Dasein can be spatial only as care, in the sense of existing as 
factically falling. Negatively this means that Dasein is never present-at- 
hand in space, not even proximally. Dasein does not fill up a bit of space 
as a Real Thing or item of equipment would, so that the boundaries 
dividing it from the surrounding space would themselves just define that 
space spatially. Dasein takes space in; this is to be understocd literally.! 
It is by no means just present-at-hand in a bit of space which its body 
fills up. In existing, it has already made room for its own leeway. It 
determines its own location in such a manner that it comes back from the 
space it has made room for to the ‘place’ which it has reserved.” To be 
able to say that Dasein is present-at-hand at a position in space, we must 
first take [auffassen] this entity in a way which is ontologically inappro- 
priate. Nor does the distinction between the ‘spatiality’ of an extended 
Thing and that of Dasein lie in the fact that Dasein knows about space; 
for taking space in [das Raum-einnehmen] is so far from identical with 
a ‘representing’ of the spatial, that it is presupposed by it instead. Neither 
may Dasein’s spatiality be interpreted as an imperfection which adheres 
to existence by reason of the fatal ‘linkage of the spirit to a body’. On the 
contrary, because Dasein is ‘spiritual’, and only because of this, it can be 
spatial in a way which remains essentially impossible for any extended 
corporeal Thing. 

Dasein’s making room for itself is constituted by directionality and, 
de-severance. How is anything of this sort existentially possible on the 


1 Das Dasein nimmt—im wörtlichen Verstande—Raum ein.’ The expression ‘nimmt 
Raum ein’ would ordinarily be translatable as ‘occupies space’ or even ‘takes up space’. 
But Heidegger is here interpreting it in a way which is closer to the root meaning. 

% ‘Existierend hat es sich je schon einen Spielraum eingeräumt. Es bestimmt je seine : 
eigenen Ort so, dass es aus dem eingeräumten Raum auf den *‘'Platz” zurückkommt, 
den es belegt hat.’ This passage can be read in several ways. ‘Spielraum’ (our ‘leeway’) 
means literally a ‘space—or room—for playing’. The expression ‘belegen einen Platz’ 
ordinarily means to book or reserve a seat at a theatre or some other place of entertain- 
ment; but in a more general and basic sense, ‘belegen’ (which is a word of many mean- 
ings) can also mean to spread something over something else so as to ‘occupy’ it 
completely—as one spreads a slice of bread with butter or covers a wall with plaster. 
On ‘einräumen’ see our note 1, p. 146, H. r11 above. 


368 


369 


420 Betng and Time 11.4 


basıs of Dasein’s temporality ? The function of temporality as the founda- 
tion for Dasein’s spatiality will be indicated briefly, but no more than is 
necessary for our later discussions of the ontological meaning of the 
‘coupling together’ ofspace and time. To Dasein’s making room for itself 
belongs the self-directive discovery of something like a region. By this 
expression what we have in mind in the first instance is the “whither” for 
the possible belonging-somewhere of equipment which is ready-to-hand 
environmentally and which can be placed. Whenever one comes across 
equipment, handles it, or moves it around or out of the way, some region 
has already been discovered. Concernful Being-in-the-world is directional 
—self-directive. Belonging-somewhere has an essential relationship to 
involvement, It always Determines itself factically in terms of the 
involvement-context of the equipment with which one concerns oneself. 
Relationships of involvement are intelligible only within the horizon of 
a world that has been disclosed. Their horizonal character, moreover, 
is what first makes possible the specific horizon of the “whither” of 
belonging-somewhere regionally. The self-directive discovery of a region is 
grounded in an ecstatically retentive awaiting of the “hither” and 
“thither” that are possible. Making room for oneself is a directional 
awaiting of a region, and as such it is equiprimordially a bringing-close 
(de-severing*) of the ready-to-hand and present-at-hand. Out of the 
region that has been discovered beforehand, concern comes back de- 
severantly to that which is closest. Both bringing-close and the estimating 
and measurement of distances within that which has been de-severed and 
is present-at-hand within-the-world, are grounded in a making-present 
belonging to the unity of that temporality in which directionality too 
becomes possible. 

Because Dasein as temporality is ecstatico-horizonal in its Being, it can 
take along with it a space for which it has made room, and it can do so 
factically and constantly. With regard to that space which it has ecstati- 
cally taken in, the “here” of its current factical situation [Lage bzw. 
Situation] never signifies a position in space, but signifies rather the 
leeway of the range of that equipmental totality with which it is most 
closely concerned—a leeway which has been opened up for it in direc- 
tionality and de-severance. 

Bringing-close makes possible the kind of handling and Being-busy 
which is ‘absorbed in the thing one is handling’ [“‘in der Sache aufge- 
hende’’]; and in such bringing-close, the essential structure of care— 
falling—makes itself known. In falling, and therefore also in the bringing- 
close which is founded ‘in the present’, the forgetting which awaits, leaps 
after the Present; this is what is distinctive in the existential-temporal 


IT. 4 Being and Time 421 
Constitution of falling. When we make something present by bringing it 
close from its “thence” [seinem Dorther], the making-present forgets the 
“yonder” [das Dort] and loses itself in itself. Thus it comes about that if 
‘observation’ of entities within-the-world commences in such a making- 
present, the illusion arises that ‘at first’ only a Thing is present-at-hand, 
here of course, but indefinitely—in a space in general. 

Only on the basis of its ecstatico-horizonal temporality is it possible for Dasein 
to break into space. The world is not present-at-hand in space; yet only 
within a world does space let itself be discovered. The ecstatical tempora- 
lity of the spatiality that is characteristic of Dasein, makes it intelligible 
that space is independent of time; but on the other hand, this same 
temporality also makes intelligible Dasein’s ‘dependence’ on space—a 
‘dependence’ which manifests itself in the well-known phenomenon that 
both Dasein’s interpretation of itself and the whole stock of significations 
which belong to language in general are ‘dominated through and through 
by ‘spatial representations’. This priority of the spatial in the Articulation 
of concepts and significations has its basis not in some specific power 
which space possesses, but in Dasein’s kind of Being. Temporality is 
essentially falling, and it loses itself in making present; not only does it 
understand itself circumspectively in terms of objects of concern which are 
ready-at-hand, but from those spatial relationships which making-present 
is constantly meeting in the ready-to-hand as having presence, it takes its 
clues for Articulating that which has been understood and can be in- 
terpreted in the understanding in general. 


971. The Temporal Meaning of Dasein’s Everydayness 


We have given an Interpretation of some structures which are essential 
to Dasein’s state-of-Being, and we have done so before exhibiting tempor- 
ality, but with the aim of leading up to this. Our analysis "ti -- temporality 
of concern has shown that these structures must be tak- “ack into tempor- 
ality existentially. At the very start of our analytic we «..! not choose as 
cur theme any definite and distinctive possibility of Dasein’s existence; 
our analytic was oriented rather by the average way of existing, which has 
nothing conspicuous about it. We called that kind of Being in which 
Dasein maintains itself proximally and for the most nart “everdayness’” xxvi 

What this expression signifies at bottom when delimited ontologically, 
remains obscure. At the beginning of our study, moreeve~, we could not 
‚ce any way of even making the existential-ontclogical me: ing of “every- 


duvness” a problem. By now, however, sems i a Iron cast on the 
1 ‘Dessen existenzial-zeitliche Konstitution ist Gadu. er 2 .. dass in ihm und 
damit auch in der ‘ gegenwärtig” fundierten Näkerevg d: ER, de Vergessen der 


Gegenwart nachspringt.’ 


370 


ts“ 
uit 


422 Being and Time II. 4 


meaning of Dasein’s Being as temporality. Can there still be any doubt 
as to the existential-temporal signification of the term “‘everydayness” ? 
All the same, we are far removed from an ontological conception of this 
phenomenon. It even remains questionable whether the explication of 
temporality which we have so far carried through is sufficient to delimit 
the existential meaning of ‘‘everydayness”’. 

“Everydayness’ manifestly stands for that way of existing inf which 
Dasein maintains itself ‘every day’ [‘‘alle Tage”]. And yet this ‘every day’ 
does not signify the sum of those ‘days’ which have been allotted to Dasein 
in its ‘lifetime’. Though this ‘every day’ is not to be understood calendri- 
cally, there is still an overtone of some such temporal character in the 
signification of the ‘everyday’ [‘‘Alltag’’]. But what we have primarily 
in mind in the expression “‘everydayness”’ is a definite “how” of existence 
by which Dasein is dominated through and through ‘for life’ [‘‘zeitlebens’’]. 
In our analyses we have often used the expression ‘proximally and for the 
most part’. ‘Proximaily’ signifies the way in which Dasein is ‘manifest’ 
in the “‘with-one-another”’ of publicness, even if ‘at bottom’ everydayness 
is precisely something which, in an existentiell manncr, it has ‘surmounted’. 
‘For the most part’ signifies the way in which Dasein shows itself for 
Everyman, not always, but ‘as a rule’. 

“Everfdayness” means the “how” in accordance with which Dasein 
‘lives unte the day’ [“in den Tag hineinlebt’’], whethcr in ail its ways of 
behaving or only in certain ones which have been prescribed by Being- 
with-one-another. To this “how” there belongs further ihe comfortable- 
ness of the accustomed, even if it forces one to do something burdensome 
and ‘repugnant’. That which will come tomorrow (and this is what every- 
day concern keeps awaiting) is ‘eternally yesterday’s’. In everydayness 
everything is all one and the same, but whatever the day cay bring is 
taken as Civersification. Everydayness is determinative for Dasein even 
when it has not chosen the “‘they”’ for its ‘hero’. 

These manifold characteristics of everydayness, however, by no means 
designate it as a mere ‘aspect’ afforded by Dasein when ‘one looks at’ the 
things men do. Everydayness is a way to be—to which, of course, that which 
is publicly manifest belongs. But it is more or less familiar to any ‘indivi- 
duai’ Dasein as a way cf existing which it may have as its own,-and it is 
familiar to it through that state-of-mind which consists of a pallid lack of 
mood. In everydayness Dasein can undergo dull ‘suffering’, sink away in 
the dullness of it, and evade it by seeking new ways in which its dispersion 
in ats affairs may be further dispersed. In the moment of vision, indeed, 
and often just ‘for that moment’, existence can even gain the mastery over 
the “everyday”; but it can never extinguish it. 


II. 4 Being and Time 423 

That which is ontically so familiar in the way Dasein has been factically 
interpreted that we never pay any heed to it, hides enigma after enigma 
existential-ontologically. The ‘natural’ horizon for starting the existential 
analytic of Dasein is only seemingly self-evident. 

But after the Interpretation of temporality which we have given thus 
far, do we find ourselves in any more promising a situation with regard 
to delimiting the structure of everydayness existentially? Or does this 
bewildering phenomenon make the inadequacy of our explication of tem- 
porality all too patent? Have we not hitherto been constantly immob- 
ilizing Dasein in certain situations, while we have, ‘consistently’ with this, 
been disregarding the fact that in living unto its days Dasein stretches itself 
along ‘temporally’ in the sequence of those days?! The “‘it’s all one and 
the same”, the accustomed, the ‘like yesterday, so today and tomorrow’, 
and the ‘for the most part’—these are not to be grasped without recourse 
to this ‘temporal’ stretching-along of Dasein. 

And is it not also a Fact of existing Dasein that in spending its time it 
takes ‘time’ into its reckoning from day to day and regulates this ‘reckoning’ 
astronomically and calendrically? Only if both Dasein’s everyday 
‘historizing’* and the reckoning with ‘time’ with which it concerns itself 
in this historizing, are included in our Interpretation of Dasein’s tempora- 
lity, will our orientation be embracing enough to enable us to make a 
problem of the ontological meaning of everydayness as such. But because 
at bottom we mean by the term ‘‘everydayness” nothing else than tem- 
porality, while temporality is made possible by Dasein’s Being,” in 
adequate conceptual delimitation of everydayness can succeed only in ua 
framework in which the meaning of Being in general and its possibic 
variations are discussed in principle. 


1‘Haben wir bisher nicht ständig das Dasein auf gewisse Lagen und Situationen 
stillgelegt und “‘konsequent”’ missachtet, dass es sich, in seine Tage hineinlebend, in teca 
Folge seiner Tage “zeitlich” erstreckt?’ The older editions have ‘stillgestellt’ rather tha- 
‘stillgelegt.’ 

2 ‘ “Geschehen” ’. Cf. our note 1, p. 41, H. 19 above. 

3 ‘Weil jedoch mit dem Titel Alitaghchkeit im Grunde nichts anderes gemeint ist als 
die Zeitlichkeit, diese aber das Sein des Daseins ermöglicht . . .’ 


ur 


bal 


"72 


V 
TEMPORALITY AND HISTORICALITY 


q 72. Existential-ontological Exposition of the Problem of History 

ALL our efforts in the existential analytic serve the one aim of finding a 
possibility of answering the question of the meaning of Being! in general. 
To work out this question,! we need to delimit that very phenomenon in 
which something like Being becomes accesstble—the phenomenon of the 
understanding of Being. But this phenomenon is one that belongs to Dasein’s 
state of Being. Only after this entity has been Interpreted in a way which 
is sufficiently primordial, can we have a conception of the understanding 
of Being, which is included in its very state of Being; only on this basis 
can we formulate the question of the Being which is understood in this 
understanding, and the question of what such understanding ‘pre- 
supposes’. | | 

Even though many structures of Dasein when taken singly are still 
obscure, it seems that by casting light upon temporality as the primordial 
condition for the possibility of care, we have reached the primordial 
Interpretation of Dasein which we require. We have exhibited temporality 
with a view to Dasein’s authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole, We 
have then confirmed the temporal Interpretation of care by demonstrating 
the temporality of concernful Being-in-the-world. Our analysis of the 
authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole has revealed that in care is 
rooted an equiprimordial connectedness of death, guilt, and conscience. 
Can Dasein be understood in a way that is more primordial than in the 
projection of its authentic existence ? 

Although up till now we have seen no possibility of a more radical 
approach to the existential analytic, yet, if we have regard for the pre- 
ceding discussion of the ontological meaning of everydayness, a difficult 
consideration comes to light. Have we indeed brought the whole of Dasein, 
as regards its authentically Being-a-whole, into the fore-having of our 
existential analysis? It may be that a formulation of the question as 


1 Italics provided only in the later editions. 


II. 5 Being and Time 425 
related to Dasein’s totality, possesses a genuinely unequivocal character 
ontologically. It may be that as regards Being-towards-the-end the question 
itself may even have found its answer. But death is only the ‘end’ of Dasein; 
and, taken formally, it is just one of the ends by which Dasein’s totality 
is closed round. The other ‘end’, however, is the ‘beginning’, the ‘birth’. 
Only that entity which is ‘between’ birth and death presents the whole 
which we have been seeking. Accordingly the orientation of our analytic 
has so far remained ‘one-sided’, in spite of all its tendencies towards a 
consideration of existent Being-a-whole and in spite of the genuineness with 
which authentic and inauthentic Being-towards-death have been explic- 
ated. Dasein has been our theme only in the way in which it exists 
‘facing forward’, as it were, leaving ‘behind it’ all that has been. Not only 
has Being-towards-the-beginning remained unnoticed; but so too, and 
above all, has the way in which Dasein stretches along between birth and 
death. The ‘connectedness of life’, in which Dasein somehow maintains 
itself constantly, is precisely what we have overlooked in our analysis of 
Being-a-whole. 

We have regarded temporality as the meaning of the Being of Dasein’s 
totality; must we not now take this back, even if what we have described 
as the ‘connectedness’ between birth and death is ontologically quite 


obscure ? Or does temporality, as we have exhibited it, first of all give us the’ 


basis on which to provide an unequivocal direction for the existential- 
ontological question of this ‘connectedness’ ? In the field of these investiga- 
tions, it is perhaps already a gain, when we learn not to take problems 
too lightly. 

What seems ‘simpler’ than to characterize the ‘connectedness of life’ 
between birth and death? It consists of a sequence of Experiences ‘in 
time’. But if one makes a more penetrating study of this way of character- 
izing the ‘connectedness’ in question, and especially of the ontological 
assumptions behind it, the remarkable upshot is that, in this sequence 
of Experiences, what is ‘really’ ‘actual’ is, in each case, just that Experi- 
ence which is present-at-hand ‘in the current “now” ’, while those Experi- 
ences which have passed away or are only coming along, either are no 
longer or are not yet ‘actual’. Dasein traverses the span of time granted 
to it between the two boundaries, and it does so in such a way that, in 
each case, it is ‘actual’ only in the “now”, and hops, as it were, through 
the sequence of “‘nows”’ of its own ‘time’. Thus it is saic. chat Dasein is 
‘temporal’. In spite of the constant changing of these Experiences, the 
Self maintains itself throughout with a certain selfsameness. Opinions 
diverge as to how that which thus persists is to be defined, and how ones to 
determine what relation it may possibly have to the changing Experiences. 


373 


374 


426 Being and Time II. 5 


The Being of this perseveringly changing connectedness of Experiences 
remains indefinite. But at bottom, whether one likes it or not, in this way 
of characterizing the connectedness of life, one has posited something 
present-at-hand ‘in time’, though something that is obviously ‘un- 
Thinglike’. 
If we have regard for what we have worked out under the title of 
“temporality” as the meaning of the Being of care, we find that while the 
ordinary interpretation of Dasein, within its own limits, has its justificae 
tion and is sufficient, we cannot carry through a genuine ontological 
analysis of the way Dasein stretches along between birth and death if we 
take this interpretation as our clue, nor can we even fix upon such an 
analysis as a problem. 

Dasein does not exist as the sum of the momentary actualities of Exper- 
iences which come along successively and disappear. Nor is there a sort of 
framework which this succession gradually fills up. For how is such a 
framework to be present-at-hand, where, in each case, only the Experience 
one is having ‘right now’ is ‘actual’,! and the boundaries of the framework 
—the birth which is past and the death which is only oncoming—lack 
actuality? At bottom, even in the ordinary way of taking the ‘connected- 
ness of life’, one does not think of this as a framework drawn tense ‘outside’ 
of Dasein and spanning it round, but one rightly seeks this connectedness 
in Dasein itself. When, however, one tacitly regards this entity ontologically 
as something present-at-hand ‘in time’, any attempt at an ontological 
characterization of the Being ‘between’ birth and death will break 
down. 

Dasein does not fill up a track or stretch ‘of life” —one which is somehow 
present-at-nand— with the phases of its momentary actualities. It stretches 
itself along in such a way that its own Being is constituted in advance as 
a stretching-along. The ‘between’ which relates to birth and death already 
lies in the Being of Dasein. On the other hand, it is by no means the case that 
Dasein ‘is’ actual in a point of time, and that, apart from this, it is ‘sur- 
rounded’ by the non-actuality of its birth and death. Understood exis- 
tentially, birth is not and never is something past in the sense of something 
no longer present-at-hand; and death is just as far from having the kind 
of Being of something still outstanding, not yet present-at-hand but 
coming along. Factical Dasein exists as born; and, as born, it is already 
dying, in the sense of Being-towards-death. As long as Dasein factically 
exists, hoth the ‘ends’ and their ‘between’ are, and they are in the only 
way which is possible on the basis of Dasein’s Being as care. Thrownness: 
and that Being towards death in which one either flees it or anticipates 


1‘, .. wo doch je nur das “aktuelle” Erlebnis “wirklich” ist 


IT. 5 Being and Time 427 
it, form a unity; and in this unity birth and death are ‘connected’ in a 
‘manner characteristic of Dasein. As care, Dasein ts the ‘between’. 

į In temporality, however, the constitutive totality of care has a possible 
basis for its unity. Accordingly it is within the horizon of Dasein’s temporal 
constitution that we must approach the ontological clarification of the 
‘connectedness of life’—that is to say, the stretching-along, the movement, 
and the persistence which are specific for Dasein. The movement [Bewegt- 375 
heit] of existence is not the motion [Bewegung] of something present-at- 
hand. It is definable in terms of the way Dasein stretches along. The 
specific movement in which Dasein is stretched along and stretches itse!f along, 
we call its ‘“‘Atstorizing”’.1 The question of Dasein’s ‘connectedness’ is the 
ontological problem of Dasein’s historizing. To lay bare the structure of 
historizing, and the existential-temporal conditions of its possibility, 
signifies that one has achieved an ontological understanding of 
historicality.* 

With the analysis of the specific movement and persistence which belong 
to Dasein’s historizing, we come back in our investigation to the problem 
which we touched upon immediately before exposing temporality to 
view—the question of the constancy of the Self, which we defined as the 
“who” of Dasein.! Self-constancy? is a way of Being of Dasein, and is 
therefore grounded in a specific temporalizing of temporality. The analysis 
of historizing will lead us face to face with the problems of a thematical 
investigation of temporalizing as such. 

If the question of historicality leads us back to these ‘sources’, then the 
locus of the problem of history has already been decided. This locus is 
not to be sought in historiology as the science of history. Even if the 
problem of ‘history’ is treated in accordance with a theory of science, not 
only aiming at the ‘epistemological’ clarification of the historiological way 
of grasping things (Simmel) or at the logic with which the concepts of 
historiological presentation are formed (Rickert), but doing so with an 
orientation towards ‘the side of the object’, then, as long as the question 
is formulated this way, history becomes in principle accessible only as the 
Object cf a science. Thus the basic phenomenon of history, which is prior 
to any possible thematizing by historiology and underlies it, has been 
irretrievably put aside. How history can become a possible object for his- 
toriology is something that may be gathered only from the kind of Being 


"14 Die spezifische Bewegtheit des erstreckten Sicherstreckens nennen wir das Geschehen des 
: ins.” On ‘Geschehen’ see our note 1, p. 41, H. 19 above. 
'8.On ‘historicality’ (*Geschichtlichkeit’) see our note 2, p. 31, H. 10 above. 
8 ‘Selbst-standigkeit’. Here we follow the reading of the older editions in which the 
4 hyphen comes at the end of a line. In the newer editions the hyphen is omitted; but 
" presumably Heidegger intends the same expanded spelling which we have already met 
_ on H. 322 and H. 332. See our notes ad loc. 


376" 


428 Being and Time IL 5 


which belongs to the historical—from historicality, and from the way it 
is rooted in temporality. | 

If we are to cast light on historieklity itself in terms of temporality, 
and primordially in terms oftemporality that is authentic, then it is essential 
to this task that we can carry it out only by construing it phenomen 
ologically.!! The existential-ontological constitution of historicality has 
been covered up by the way Dasein’s history is ordinarily interpreted; we 
must get hold of it in spite of all this. The existential way of construing 
historicality has its definite supports in the ordinary understanding of 
Dasein, and is guided by those existential structures at which we have 
hitherto arrived. 

We shall first describe the ordinary ways in which history is conceived, 
so that we may give our investigation an orientation as to those items 
which are commonly held to be essential for history. Here, it must be 
made plain what is primordially considered as historical. The point of 
attack for expounding the ontological problem of historicality will thu 
be designated. 

Our Interpretation of Dasein’s authentic potentiality-for-Being- 
whole and our analysis of care as temporality—an analysis which ha 
arisen from this Interpretation—offer us the clue for construing historio 
ality existentially. The existential projection of Dasein’s historicality 
merely reveals what already lies enveloped in the temporalizing d 
temporality. In accordance with the way in which historicality is rooted 
in care, Dasein exists, in each case, as authentically or inauthentically 
historical. It becomes plain that Dasein’s inauthentic historicality lies in 
that which—under the title of “‘everydayness’’—we have looked upon, it 
the existential analytic of Dasein, as the horizon that is closest to us. 

Disclosing and interpreting belong essentially to Dasein’s historizing. 
Out of this kind of Being of the entity which exists historically, ther 
arises the existentiell possibility of disclosing history explicitly and getting 
it in our grasp. The fact that we. can make history our theme—that is to 
say, disclose it historiologically—is the presupposition for the possibility 
of the way one ‘builds up the historical world in the humane sciences, 
The existential Interpretation of historiology as a science aims solely a 
demonstrating its ontological derivation from Dasein’s historicality. 
Only from here can we stake out the boundaries within which any theory 
of science that is oriented to the factical workings of science, may expos 
itself to the accidental factors in its way of formulating questions. 

In analysing the kistoricality of Dasein we shall try to show that this entity i 


_ not ‘temporal’ because tt ‘stands in hestory’, but thai, on the contrary, tt exist 


historically and can so exist only because it is temporal in the very basis of its Being 


I. 5 Being and Time 429 

Nevertheless, Dasein must also be called ‘temporgl’ in the sense of 
Being ‘in time’. Even without a developed historiology, factical Dasein 
needs and uses a calendar and a clock. Whatever may happen ‘to Dasein), 
it experiences it as happening ‘in time’, In the same way, the processes ot 
Nature, whether living or lifeless, are encountered ‘in time’. They are 
within-time. So while our analysis of how the ‘time’ of within-time-ness 
has its source in temporality will be deferred until the next chapter,!!! qt 

would be easy to put this before our discussion of the connection between 
historicality and temporality. The historical es;grdinarily characterized 
with the help of the time of within-time-ness. But if this ordinary charac- 
terization is to be stripped of its seeming self-evidence and exclusiveness, 
historicality must first be ‘deduced’ purely in terms of Dasein’s primordial 
temporality; this is demanded even by the way these are ‘objectively’ 
connecicd. Since, however, time as within-time-ness also ‘stems’ from the 
temporality of Dasein, historicality and within-time-ness turn out to be 
equiprimordial. Thus, within its limits, the ordinary interpretation of the 
temporal character of history is justified. 

After this first characterization of the course of the ontological exposition 
of historicality in terms of temporality, do we still need explicit assurance 
that the following investigation does not rest upon a belief that the 
problem of history is to be solved by a coup de main? The poverty of the 
‘categorial’ means.at our disposal, and the unsureness of the primary 
ontological horizons, become the more obtrusive, the more the problem of 
history is traced to its primordial roots. In the following study, we shall 
content ourselves with indicating the ontological locus of the problem of 
historicality. The researches of Dilthey were, for their part, pioneering 
work; but today’s generation has not as yet made them its own. In the 
following analysis the issue is solely one of furthering their adoption. 

Our exposition of the existential problem of historicality—an exposition 
which is necessarily limited, moreover, in that its goal is one of funda- 
mental ontology—is divided up as follows: the ordinary understanding of 
history, and Dasein’s historizing (Section 73); the basic constitution of 
historicality (Section 74) ; Dasein’s historicality, and world-history (Section 
75); the existential source of historiology in Dasein’s historicality (Section 
76); the connection of the foregoing exposition of the problem of his- 
toricality with the researches of Dilthey and the ideas of Count Yorck 
(Section 77). 


{ 73. The Ordinary Understanding of History, and Dasein’s Historizing 


Our next aim is to find the right position for attacking the primordial 
question of the essence of history—that is to say, for construing historicality 


377 


378 


379 


430 Being and Time IL; 
existentially. This position is designated by that which is primordially 
historical. We shall begin our study, therefore, by characterizing what on 
has in view in using the expressions ‘history’ and ‘historical’ in the 
ordinary interpretation of Dasein. These expressions get used in several 
ways. 

The most obvious ambiguity of the term ‘history’ is one that has often 
been noticed, and there is nothing ‘fuzzy’ about it. It evinces itself in that 
this term may mean the ‘historical actuality’ as well as the possible science 
of it. We a provisionally eliminate the signification of ‘history’ in the 
sense of a “‘science of history” (historiology). 

The expression ‘history’ has various significations with which one has 
in view neither the science of history nor even history as an Object, but 
this very entity itself, not necessarily Objectified. Among such significa: 
tions, that in which this entity is understood as something past, may well be 
the pre-eminent usage. This signification is evinced in the kind of talk in 
which we say that something or other “already belongs to history”. Here: 
‘past? means “no longer present-at-hand”, or even “still present-at-hand 
indeed, but without having any ‘effect’ on the ‘Present’ ”’. Of course, the 
historical as that which is past has also the opposite signification, when 
we say, “One cannot get away from history.” Here, by “history”, we have 
in view that which is past, but which nevertheless is still having effects. 
Howsoever the historical, as that which is past, is understood to be related 
to the ‘Present’ in the sense of what is actual ‘now’ and ‘today’, and to be 
related to it, either positively or privatively, in such a way as to have 
effects upon it. Thus ‘the past’ has a remarkable double meaning; the. 
past belongs irretrievably to an earlier time; it belonged to the events of 
that time; and in spite of that, it can still be present-at-hand ‘now’—for 
instance, the remains of a Greek temple. With the temple, a ‘bit of the. 
past’ is still ‘in the present’. 

What we next have in mind with the term “history” is not so müh 
‘the past’ in the sense of that which is past, but rather derivation [Herk- 
unft] from such a past. Anything that ‘has a history’ stands in the context 
of a becoming. In such becoming, ‘development’ is sometimes a rise, 
sometimes a fall. What ‘has a history’ in this way can, at the same time, | 
‘make’ such history. As “epoch-making’, it determines ‘a future’ ‘in the: 
present’. Here “history” signifies a ‘context’ of events and ‘effects’, which. 
draws on through ‘the past’, the ‘Present’, and the ‘future’. On this view, 
the past has no special priority. 

Further, “history” signifies the totality of those entities-which change 
‘in time’, and indeed the transformations and vicissitudes of men, of 
human groupings and their ‘cultures’, as distinguished from Nature, which 


3 


II. 5 Being and Time 431 
likewise operates ‘in time’. Here what one has in view is not so much a 
kind of Being—historizing—as it is that realm of entities which one 
distinguishes from Nature by having regard for the way in which man’s 
existence is essentially determined by ‘spirit’ and ‘culture’, even the:ch 
- in a certain manner i+ature too belongs to “history” as thus understood. 

Finally, whatever has been handed down to us is as such hel to be *hıs- 
torical’, whether it is something which we know historiologicalty, or sorae- 
thing that has been taken over as self-evident, with its derivation hidden. 

If we take these four significations together, the upshot is that history 
is that specific historizing of existent Dasein which comes to pass in time, 
so that the historizing which is ‘past’ in our Being-with-one-another, and 
which at the same time has been ‘handed down to us’ and is continuingly 
effective, is regarded as “‘history” in the sense that gets emphasized. 

The four significations are connected in that they relate to man as the 
‘subject’ of events. How is the historizing character of such events to be 
defined? Is historizing a sequence of processes, an ever-changing emerg- 
ence and disappearance of events? In what way does this historizing of 
history belong to Dasein? Is Dasein already factically ‘present-at-hand’ 
to begin with, so that on occasion it can get ‘into a history’ ? Does Dasein 
first become historical by getting intertwined with events and circum- 
stances? Or is the Being of Dasein constituted first of all by historizing, so 
that anything like circumstances, events, and vicissitudes is ontologically 
possible only because Dasein is historical in its Being? Why is it that the 
function of the past gets particularly stressed when the Dasein which 
historizes ‘in time’ is characterized ‘temporally’ ? 

If history belongs to Dasein’s Being, and this Being is based on tempor- 
ality, then it would be easy to begin the existential analysis of historicality 
with those characteristics of the historical which obviously have a temporal 
meaning. Therefore, by characterizing more precisely the remarkably 
privileged position of the ‘past’ in the concept of history, we shall prepare 
the way for expounding the basic constitution of historicality. 

The ‘antiquities’ preserved in museums (household gear, for example) 
belong to a ‘time which is past’; yet they are still present-at-hand in the 
‘Present’. How far is such equipment historical, when it is not yet past? Is 
it historical, let us say, only because it has become an object of historio- 
logical interest, of antiquarian study or national lore? But such equip- 
ment can be a historiological object only because it is in itself somehow 
historical. We repeat the question: by what right do we call this entity 
“historical”, when it is not yet past? Or do these ‘Things have ‘in 
themselves’ ‘something past’, even though they are still present-at-hand 
today? Then are these, which are present-at-hand, still what they were? 


380 


381 


432 Being and Time IT. 5 


Manifestly these ‘Things’ have altered. The gear has become fragile or 
worm-eaten ‘in the course of time’. But that specific character of the past 
which makes it something historical, does not lie in this transience,? which 
continues even during the Being-present-at-hand of the equipment in the 
museum. What, then, is past in this equipment? What were these “Things’ 
which today they are no longer? They are still definite items of equipment 
for use; but they are out of use. Suppose, however, that they were still in 
use today, like many a household heirloom; would they then be not yet 
historical ? All the same, whether they are in use or out of use, they are no 
longer what they were. What is ‘past’? Nothing else than that world 
within which they belonged to a context of equipment and were en- 
countered as ready-to-hand and used by a concernful Dasein who was-in- 
the-world. ‘That world is no longer. But what was formerly within-the-world 
with respect to that world is still present-at-hand. As equipment belong- 
ing to a world, that which is now still present-at-hand can belong 
nevertheless to the ‘past’. But what do we signify by saying of a world that 
it is no longer? A world is only in the manner of existing Dasein, which 
factically is as Being-in-the-world.? 

Thus the historical character of, the antiquities that are still preserved 
is grounded in the ‘past’ of that Dasein to whose world they belonged. 
But according to this, only ‘past’ Dasein would be historical, not Dasein 
‘in the present’. However, can Daseim be past at all, if we define ‘past’ as 
‘now no longer either present-at-hand.or ready-to-hand oe Manifetiy. Dasein can 
never be past, not because Dasein is nan-transient, but because it essentially 
can never be present-at-hand. Rathees {f it is, it exists. A Dasein which no 
longer exists, however, is not past; m the ontologically strict sense; it is 
rather “‘having-been-there” [da-gew#s me: ‚The antiquities which are still 
present-at-hand have a character: Ahi por and of history by reason of 
the fact that they have belonged as spiment to a world that has been— 
the world of a Dasein that has’ bees ithere—and that they have been 
derived from that world. This Daseñ i is: what i is primarily historical. But 
does Dasein first become historical in. that it is no longer there? Or is it not 
historical precisely in so far as it. factically exists? Is Dasein just something 
that “has been’? in the sense of “having been. there” ‚or has tt been as something 
futural which is making present—thata Fe Fay in the temporalizing of its temporality? 

ug ER 
From this provisional analysis: GE Yipment which belongs to history 
and which is still present-at-h; HF though somehow ‘past’, it becomes 
plain that such entities are histo a gly by reason of their belonging to 
the world. But the world has an, torical kind of Being because it makes 


7’) and ‘Vergangenheit’ (‘the past’). 


1 “Verganglichkeit’. Of. ‘ver ehen” "hak: 
Wea astins, das als In-der-Welt-sein faktisch ist.’ 


2 ‘Welt ist nur in der Weise des exis tie 


v 
= Eu 
eo 


II. 5 Being and Time 433 


up an ontological attribute of Dasein. It may be shown further that when 
one designates a time as ‘the past’, the meaning of this is not unequivocal ; 
but ‘the past’ is manifestly distinct from one’s having been, with which 
. we have become acquainted as something constitutive for the ecstatical 
unity of Dasein’s temporality. This, however, only makes the enigma 
ultimately more acute; why is it that the historical is determined pre- 
dominantly by the ‘past’, or, to speak more appropriately, by the character 
of having-been, when that character is one that temporalizes itself 
equiprimordially with the Present and the future? 

We contend that what is primarily historical is Dasein. That which fs 
secondarily historical, however, is what we encounter within-the-world— 
not only equipment ready-to-hand, in the widest sense, ‘but also the 
environing Nature as ‘the very soil of history.’ Entities other than Dasein 
which are historical by reason of belonging to the world, are what we call 
‘world-historical’. It can be shown that the ordinary conception of ‘world- 
history’ arises precisely from our orientation to what is thus secondarily 
historical. World-historical entities do not first get their historical charac- 
ter, let us say, by reason of an historiological Objectification; they get it 
rather as those entities which they are in themselves when they are en- 
countered within-the-world. _ l 

In analysing the historical character of equipment which is still present- 
at-hand, we have not only been led back to Dasein as that which is 
primarily historical; but at the same time we have been made to doubt 
whether the temporal characterization of the historical in general may be 
oriented primarily to the Being-in-time of anything: present-at-hand. 
Entities do not become ‘more historical’ by being moved off into a past 
which is always farther and farther away, so that the oldest of them would 
be the most authentically historical. On the other hand, if the ‘temporal’ 
distance from ‘‘now and today” is of no primary constitutive significance 
for the historicality of entities that are authentically historical, this is not 
because these entities are not ‘in time’ and are timeless, but because they 
exist temporally in so primordial a manner that nothing present-at-hand ‘in 
time’, whether passing away or still coming along, could ever—hy its 
ontological essence—be temporal in such a way. 

It will be said that these deliberations have been rather petty. No one 
denies that at bottom human Dasein is the primary ‘subject’ of history; 
and the ordinary conception of history, which we have cited, says so 
plainly enough. But with the thesis that “Dasein is historical’, one has in 
view not just the ontical Fact that in man we are presented with a more 
or less important ‘atom’ in the workings of world-history, and that he 
.. remains the plaything of circumstances and events. This thesis raises the 


382 


383 


434 Being and Time IL 5 


problem: to what extent and on the. basis of what ontological conditions, does 
historicality belong, as an essential constitutive state, to the subjectivity of the 
‘historical’ subject? 


| 74. "ie Rase Constitution of Historicality 

Dast. factically has its ‘history’, and it can have something of the sort 
because the Being of this entity is constituted by historicality. We must 
now jt ify this thesis, with the aim of expounding the ontological problem 
of history as an existential one. The Being of Dasein has been defined 
as cars. Care is grounded in temporality. Within the range of temporality, 
therefore, the kind of historizing which gives existence its definitely 
historical character, must be sought. Thus the Interpretation of Dasein’s 
historicality will prove to be, at bottom, just a more concrete working out 
of temporality. We first revealed temporality with regard to that way of 
existing authentically which we characterized as anticipatory resolute- 
ness. How far does this imply an authentic historizing of Dasein ? 

We have defined “resoluteness” as a projecting of oneself upon one’s 
own Being-guilty—a projecting which is reticent and ready for anxiety.!Y 
Resoluteness gains its authenticity as anticipatory resoluteness.” In this, 
Dasein understands itself with regard to its potentiality-for-Being, and it 
does so in such a manner that it will go right under the eyes of Death in 
order thus to take over in its thrownness that entity which it is itself, and 
to take it over wholly. The resolute taking over of one’s factical ‘there’, 
signifies, at the same time, that the Situation is one which has been 
resolved upon. In the existential analysis we cannot, in principle, discuss 
what Dasein factically resolves in any particular case. Our investigation 
excludes even the existential projection of the factical possibilities of 
existence. Nevertheless, we must ask whence, in general, Dasein can draw 
those possibilities upon which it factically projects itself. One’s anticipa- 
tory projection of oneself on that possibility of existence which is not to be 
outstripped—on death—guarantees only the totality and authenticity of 
one’s resoluteness. But those possibilities of existence which have been 
factically disclosed are not to be gathered from death. And this is still less 
the case when one’s anticipation of this possibility does not signify that 
one is speculating about it, but signifies precisely that one is coming back 
to one’s factical “there”. Will taking over the thrownness of the Self into 
its world perhaps disclose an horizon from which existence snatches its 
factical possibilities away?! Have we not said in addition that Dasein 
never comes back behind its thrownness ?¥! Before we decide too quickly 


1 ‘Soll etwa die Übernahme der Geworfenheit des Selbst in seine Welt einen Horizont 
erschliessen, dem die Existenz ihre faktischen Möglichkeiten entreisst ?’ 


` 


II. 5 Being and Time 435 


whether Dasein draws it authentic possibilities of existence from thrown- 
ness or not, we must assure ourselves that we have a full conception -of 
thrownness as a basic attribute of care. 

As thrown, Dasein has indeed been delivered over to itself and to its 
potentiality-tor-Being, but as Being-in-the-world. As thrown, it has been 
submitted to a ‘world’, and exists factically with Others. Proximally and 
for the most part the Self is lost in the “they”. It understands itself in 
terms of those possibilities of existence which ‘circulate’ in the ‘average’ 
public way of interpreting Dasein today. These possibilities have mostly 
been made unrecognizable by ambiguity; yet they are well known to us. 
The authentic existentiell understanding is so far from extricating itself 
from the way of interpreting Dasein which has come down to us, that in 
each case it is in terms of this interpretation, against it, and yet again for 
it, that any possibility one has chosen is seized upon in one’s resolution. 

The resoluteness in which Dasein comes back to itself, discloses current 
factical possibilities of authentic existing, and discloses them in terms of the 
heritage which that resoluteness, as thrown, takes over. In one’s coming back 
resolutely to one’s thrownness, there is hidden a handing down to oneself of 
the possibilities that have come down to one, but not necessarily as having 
thus come down.? If everything ‘good’ is a heritage, and the character of 
‘goodness’ lies in making authentic existence possible, then the handing 
down of a heritage constitutes itself in resoluteness. The more authentically 
Dasein resolves—and this means that in anticipating death it understands 
itself unambiguously in terms of its ownmost distinctive possibility—the 
more unequivocally does it choose and find the possibility of its existence, 
and the less does it do so by accident. Only by the anticipation of death 
is every accidental and ‘provisional’ possibility driven out. Only Being- 
free for death, gives Dasein its goal outright and pushes existence into 
its finitude. Once one has grasped the finitude of one’s existence, it 
snatches one back from the endless multiplicity of possibilities which offer 
themselves as closest to one—those of comfortableness, shirking, and 
taking things lightly—and brings Dasein into the simplicity of its fate 
[Schicksals]. This is how we designate Dasein’s primordial historizing, 
which lies in authentic resoluteness and in which Dasein hands itself 
down to itself, free for death, in a possibility which it has inherited and 
yet has chosen. 


1 ‘Die Entschlossenheit, in der das Dasein auf sich selbst zuriickkommt, erschliesst die 
jeweili faktischen Möglichkeiten eigentlichen Existierens aus dem Erbe, das sie als 
geworfene übernimmt. Das entschlossene Zurückkommen auf die Geworfenheit birgt ein 
Sichüberliefern überkommener Möglichkeiten in sich, obzwar nicht notwendig als 
überkommener.’ The grammatical structure of both sentences is ambiguous. Notice also 
the counterpoint of the verbs ‘zurückkommen’, “überkommen’, ‘überliefern’, ‘überneh- 
men,’ which cannot be reproduced in translation. 


384 


385 


t 


436 Being and Time 1.5 


Dasein can be reached by the blows of fate only because in the depths 
of its Being Dasein is fate in the sense we have described. Existing fatefully 
in the resoluteness which hands itself down, Dasein has been disclosed as 
Being-in-tlic-world both for the ‘fortunate’ circumstances which ‘come its 
way’ and for the cruelty of accidents. Fate does not first arise from the 
clashing together of events and circumstances. Even one who is irresolute 
gets driven about by these—more so than one who has chosen; and yet he 
can ‘have’ no fate.! 

If Dasein, by anticipation, lets death become powerful in itself, then, as 
free for death, Dasein understands itself in its own superior power, the 
power of its finite freedom, so that in this freedom, which ‘is’ only in its 
having chosen to make such a choice, it can take over the powerlessness of 
abandonment to its having done so, and can thus come to have a clear 
vision for the accidents of the Situation that has been disclosed.? But if 
fateful Dasein, as Being-in-the-world, exists essentially in Being-with 
Others, its historizing is a co-historizing and is determinative for it as 
destiny [Geschick]. This is how we designate the historizing of the com- 
munity, ofa people. Destiny is not something that puts itself together out 
of individual fates, any more than Being-with-one-another can be con- 
ceived as the occurring together of several Subjects.” Our fates have 
already been guided in advance, in our Being with one another in the same 
world and in our resoluteness for definite possibilities. Only in communi- 
cating and in struggling does the power of destiny become free. Dasein’s 
fateful destiny in and with its ‘generation’v!!! goes to make up the full 
authentic historizing of Dasein. 

‘Fate is that powerless superior power. which puts itself in readiness for 
adversities—the power of projecting oneself upon one’s own Being-guilty, 
and of doing so reticently, with readiness for anxiety. As such, fate requires 


1 This statement may well puzzle the English-speaking reader, who would perhaps be 
less troubled if he were to read that the irresolute man can have no ‘destiny’. As we shall 
see in the next paragraph, Heidegger has chosen to differentiate sharply between the 
words ‘Schicksal’ and ‘Geschick’, which are ordinarily synonyms. Thus ‘Schicksal’ (our 
‘fate’) might be described as the ‘destiny’ of the resolute individual; ‘Geschick’ (our 
‘destiny’) is rather the ‘destiny’ of a larger group, or of Dasein as a member of such a 
group. This usage of ‘Geschick’ is probably to be distinguished from that which we have 
met on H. 16, 19, and perhaps even 379, where we have preferred to translate it by 
‘vicissitude’, The suggestion of an etymological connection between ‘Schicksal’ and 
‘Geschick’ on the one hand and ‘Geschichte’ (our ‘history’) and ‘Geschehen’ (our ‘his- 
torizing’) on the other, which is exploited in the next paragraph, is of course lost in 
translation. S 

2 ‘Wenn das Dasein vorlaufend den Tod in sich mächtig werden lässt, versteht es sich, 
frei für ihn, in der eigenen Ubermacht seiner endlichen Freiheit, um in dieser, die je nur 
“is” im Gewählthaben der Wahl, die Ohnmacht der Uberlassenheit an es selbst zu 
übernehmen und für die Zufälle der erschlossenen Situation hellsichtig zu werden.’ It 
should perhaps be pointed out that ‘Ohnmacht’ can also mean a ‘faint’ or a ‘swoon’, and 
that ‘Hellsichtigkeit’ is the regular term for ‘clairvoyance’. Thus the German reader 
might easily read into this passage a suggestion of the seer’s mystical trance. 


Il. 5 Being and Time 437 
as the ontological condition for its possibility, the state of Being of care— 
that is to say, temporality. Only if death, guilt, conscience, freedom, and 
finitude reside together equiprimordially in the Being of an entity as they 
do in care, can that entity exist in the mode of fate; that ıs to say, only 
then can it be historical in the very depths of its existence. 

Only an entity which, in its Being, is essentially futural so that it is free for its 
death and can let itself be thrown back upon its factical ‘‘there’’ by shattering itself 
against death—that is to say, only an entity which, as futural, is equiprimordtally in 
the process of having-been, can, by handing down to itself the possibility it has 
inherited, take over its own thrownness and be in the moment of vision for 
‘its time’. Only authentic temporality which is at the same time finite, makes possible 
something like fate—that is to say, authentic historicality. 

It is not necessary that in resoluteness one should explicitly know the 
origin of the possibilities upon which that resoluteness projects itself. It is 
rather in Dasein’s temporality, and there only, that there lies any pos- 
sibility that the existentiell potentiality-for-Being upon which it projects 
itself can be gleaned explicitly from the way in which Dasein has been 
traditionally understood. The resoluteness which comes back to itself and 
hands itself down, then becomes the repetition of a possibility of existence 
that has come down to us. Repeating is handing down explicitly—that is to 
say, going back into the possibilities of the Dasein that has-been-there.? 
The authentic repetition of a possibility of existence that has been—the 
possibility that Dasein may choose its hero—is grounded existentially in 
anticipatory resoluteness; for it is in resoluteness that one first chooses the 
choice which makes one free for the struggle of loyally following in the 
footsteps of that which can be repeated. But when one has, by repetition, 
handed down to oneself a possibility that has been, the Dasein that has- 
been-there is not disclosed in order to be actualized over again. The 
repeating of that which is possible does not bring again [Wiederbringen] 
something that is ‘past’, nor does it bind the ‘Present’ back to that which 
has already been ‘outstripped’. Arising, as it does, from a resolute pro- 
jection of oneself, repetition does not let itself be persuaded of something 
by what is ‘past’, just in order that this, as something which was formerly 

1 ‘Die Wiederholung ist die ausdrückliche Überlieferung, das heisst, der Rückgang in Mög- 
lichkeiten des dagewesenen Daseins’. (In the earlier editions the article ‘Die’, as well as 
the words now italicized, appears in spaced type.) 

While we usually translate ‘wiederholen’ as ‘repeat’, this English word is hardl 
adequate to express Heidegger’s meaning. Etymologically, ‘wiederholen’ means ‘to fetc 
again’; in modern German usage, however, this is expressed by the cognate separable 
verb ‘wieder . . . holen’, while ‘wiederholen’ means simply ‘to repeat’ or “do over again’. 
Heidegger departs from both these meanings, as he 1s careful to point out. For him, 
‘wiederholen’ does not mean either a mere mechanical repetition or an attempt to recon- 


stitute the physical past; it means rather an attempt to go back to the past and retrieve 
former possibilities, which are thus ‘explicitly handed down’ or ‘transmitted’, i 


386 


438 Being and Time II. 5 


actual, may recur. Rather, the repetition makes a rectprocative rejoinder to 
the possibility of that existence which has-been-there. But when such a 
rejoinder is made to this possibility in a resolution, it is made in a moment 
of vision; and as such it is at the same time a disavowal of that which in 
the “today”, is working itself out as the ‘past’.! Repetition does not abandon 
itself to that which is past, nor does it aim at progress. In the moment 
of vision authentic existence is indifferent to both these alternatives. 

We characterize repetition as a mode of that resoluteness which hands 
itself down—the mode by which Dasein exists explicitly as fate. But if 
fate constitutes the primordial historicality of Dasein, then history has its 
essential importance neither in what is past nor in the “today” and its 
‘connection’ with whatis past, but in that authentic historizing of existence 
which arises from Dasein’s future. As a way of Being for Dasein, history has 
its roots so essentially in the future that death, as that possibility of Dasein 
which we have already characterized, throws anticipatory existence back 
upon its factical thrownness, and so for the first time imparts to having- 
been its peculiarly privileged position in the historical. Authentic Being- 
towards-death—thai is to say, the finitude of temporality—ts the hidden basis of 
Dasein’s historicality. Dasein does not first become historical in repetition; 
but because it is historical as temporal, it can take itself over in its history 
by rep-:ating. For this, no historiology is as yet needed. 

Resoluteness implies handing oneself down by anticipation to the 
“there” of the moment of vision; and this handing down we call “‘fate”’. 
This is also the ground for destiny, by which we understand Dasein’s 
historizing in Being-with Others. In repetition, fateful destiny can be dis- 
closed explicitly as bound up with the heritage which has come down to us. 
By repetition, Dasein first has its own history made manifest. Historizing is 
itself grounded existentially in the fact that Dasein, as temporal, is open 
ecstatically; so too is the disclosedness which belongs to historizing, or 
rather so too is the way in which we make this disclosedness our own. 

That which we have hitherto been characterizing as “historicality” to 
conform with the kind of historizing which lies in anticipatory resolute- 
ness, we now designate as Dasein’s “authentic historicality”. From the 
phenomena of handing down and repeating, which are rooted in the 


1*Die Wiederholung lässt sich, einem entschlossenen Sichentwerfen entspringend, 
nicht vom “Vergangenen” überreden, um es als das vormals Wirkliche nur wieder- 
kehren zu lassen. Die Wiederholung erwidert vielmehr die Möglichkeit der dagewesenen 
Existenz. Die Erwiderung der Möglichkeit im Entschluss ist aber zugleich als augenblick- 
liche der Widerruf dessen, was in Heute sich als “Vergangenheit” auswirkt.” The idea 
seems to be that in resolute repetition one is having, as it were, a conversation with the 
past, in which the past Seba ian certain possibilities fis adoption, but in which one makes 
a rejoinder to this proposal by ‘reciprocating’ with the proposal of other possibilities as a 
sort of rebuke to the past, which one now disavows. (The punning treatment of ‘wieder’ 
and ‘wider’ is presumably intentional.) 


a 


wr 


Il. 5 Being and Time 439 
future, it has become plain why the historizing of authentic history lies 
preponderantly in having heen. But it remains all the more enigmatic in 
what way this historizing, as fate, is to constitute the whole ‘connected- 
ness’ of Dasein from its birth to its death. How can recourse to resoluteness 
bring us any enlightenment? Is not each resolution just one more single 
‘Experience’ in the sequence of the whole connectedness of our Exper- 
iences? Is the ‘connectedness’ of authentic historizing to consist, let us say, 
of an uninterrupted sequence of resolutions? Why is it that the question 
of how the ‘connectedness of life’ is Constituted finds no adequate and 
satisfying answer? Is not our investigation overhasty ? Does it not, in the 
end, hang too much on the answer, without first having tested the legi- 
timacy of the question? Nothing is so plain from the course of the existential 
analytic so far, as the Fact that the ontology of Dasein is always falling 
back upon the allurements of the way in which Being is ordinarily under- 
stood. The only way of encountering this fact methodologically is by 
studying the source of the question of how Dasein’s connectedness is Con- 
stituted, no matter how ‘obvious’ this question may be, and by determining 
within what ontological horizon it moves. 

If historicality belongs to the Being of Dasein, then even inauthentic 
existing must be historical. What if it is Dasein’s inauthentic historicality 
that has directed. our questioning to the ‘connectedness of life’ and has 
blocked off our access to authentic historicality and its own peculiar ‘con- 
nectedness’ ? However this may be treated, we cannot do withouf a study 
of Dasein’s inauthentic historicality if our exposition of the ontological 
problem of history is to be adequate and complete. 


4 75. Dasein’s Historicality, and World-history 


Proximally and for the most part, Dasein understands itself in terms of 
that which it encounters in the environment and that with which it is 
circumspectively concerned. This understanding is not just a bare taking 
cognizance of itself, such as accompanies all Dasein’s ways of behaving. 
Understanding signifies one’s projecting oneself upon one’s current 
possibility of Being-in-the-world; that is to say, it signifies existing as this 
possibility. Thus understanding, as common sense, constitutes even the 
inauthentic existence of the “they”. When we are with one another in 
public, our everyday concern does not encounter just equipment and work; 
it likewise encounters what is ‘given’ along with these: ‘affairs’, under- 
takings, incidents, mishaps. The ‘world’ belongs to everyday trade and 
traffic as the soil from which they grow and the arena where they are dis- 
played. When weare with one another in public, the Othersare encountered 
in activity of such a kind that one is ‘in the swim’ with it -‘oneself’, 


387 


388 


369 


440 Being and Time i JI. 5 


One is acquainted with it, discusses it, encourages it, combats it, retains 
it, and forgets it, but one always does so primarily with regard to what is 
getting done and what is ‘going to come of it’ [was . . . “herausspringt”]. 
We compute the progress which the individual Dasein has made—his 
stoppages, readjustments, and ‘output’; and we do so proximally in terms 
of that with which he is concerned—its course, its status, its changes, its 
availability. No matter how trivial it may be to allude to the way in 
which Dasein is understood in everyday common sense, ontologically this 
understanding is by no means transparent. But in that case, why should 
not Dasein’s ‘connectedness’ be defined in terms of what it is concerned 
with, and what it ‘Experiences’? Do not equipment and work and every 
thing which Dasein dwells alongside, belong to ‘history’ too? If not, is 
the historizing of history just the isolated running-off of ‘streams of 


Experience’ in individual subjects ? 


Indeed history is neither the connectedness of motions in the alterations 
of Objects, nor a free-floating sequence of Experiences which ‘subjects’ 
have had. Doss the historizing of history then pertain to the way subject 
and Object are ‘linked together’? Even if one assigns [zuweist] historizing 
to the subject-Object relation, we then have to ask what kind of Being 
belongs to this linkage as such, if this is what basically ‘historizes’. The 
thesis of Dasein’s historicality does not say that the worldless subject is 
historical, but that what is historical is the entity that exists as Being-in- 
the-world. The historizing of history ts the historizing of Being-in-the-world. 
Dasein’s historicality is essentially the historicality of the world, which, on 
the basis of ecstatico-horizontal temporality, belongs to the temporalizing of 
that temporality. In so far as Dasein exists factically, it already encounters 
that which has been discovered within-the-world. With the existence of 
historical Being-in-the-world, what is ready-to-hand and what ts present-at-hand 
have already, in every case, been incorporated into the history of the world. Equip- 
ment and work—for instance, books—have their ‘fates’; buildings and 
institutions have their history. And even Nature is historical. It is not 
historical, to be sure, in so far as we speak of ‘natural history’ ;)* but 
Nature is historical as a countryside, as an area that has been colonized 
or exploited, as a battlefield, or as the site of a cult. These entities within- 
the-world are historical as such, and their history does not signify some- 
thing ‘external’ which merely accompanies the ‘inner’ history of the 
‘soul’. We call such entities “the world-historical”. Here we must notice 
that the expression ‘world-history’ which we have chosen and which is 
here understood ontologically, has a double signification. The expression 
signifies, for one thing, the historizing of the world in its essential existent 
unity with Dasein. At the same time, we have here in view the ‘historizing’ 


IT. 5 Being and Time | 441 
within-the-world of what is ready-to-hand and present-at-hand, in so far 
as entities within-the-world are, in every case, discovered with the 
factically existent world. The historical world is fuctical only as the world 
of entities within-the-world. That which ‘happens’ with equipment and 


work as such has its own character of movement, and this character has: 


been completely obscure up till now. When, for instance, a ring gets 
‘handed over’ to someone and ‘worn’, this is a kind of Being in which it 
does not simply suffer changes of location. The movement of historizing 
in which something ‘happens to something’ is not to be grasped in 
terms of motion as change of location. This holds for all world- 
historical ‘processes’ and events, and even, in a certain manner, for 
‘natural catastrophes’. Quite apart from the fact that if we were to follow 
up the problem of the ontological structure of world-historical historizing, 
we would necessarily be transgressing the limits of our theme, we can 
refrain from this all the more because the very aim of this exposition is to 
lead us face to face with the ontological enigma of the movement of 
historizing in general. 

We need only delimit that phenomenal range which we necessarily 
must also have in view ontologically when we taik of Dasein’s historic- 
ality. The transcendence of the world has a temporal foundation; and by 
reason of this, the world-historical is, in every case, already ‘Öbjectively’ 
there in the historizing of existing Being-in-the-world, without beine 
grasped historiologically. And because factical Dasein, in falling, is absorbed 
in that with which it concerns itself, it understands its history world- 
historically in the first instance. And because, further, the ordinary 
understanding of Being understands ‘Being’ as presence-at-hand without 
further differentiation, the Being of the world-historical is experienced 
and interpreted in the sense of something present-at-hand which comes 
along, has presence, and then disappears. And finally, because the mean- 
ing of Being in general is held to be something simply self-evident, the 
question about the kind of Being of the world-historical and about the 
movement of historizing in general has ‘really’ just the barren circum- 
stantiality of a verbal sophistry. 

Everyday Dasein has been dispersed into the many kinds of things 
which daily ‘come to pass’. The opportunities and circumstances which 
concern keeps ‘tactically’ awaiting in advance, have ‘fate’ as their out- 
come. In terms of that with which inauthentically existing Dasein concerns 
itself, it first computes its history. In so doing, it is driven about by its 
‘affairs’. So if it wants to come to itself, it must first pull itself together! from 
the dispersion and disconnectedness of the very things that have ‘come to 


1 ‘zusammenholen’. The older editions have ‘zusammen holen’. 


390 


391 


442 Being and Time Il. 3 


pass’; and because of this, it is only then that there at last arises from the 
horizon of the understanding which belongs to inauthentic historicality, 
the question of now one is te establish a ‘connectedness’ of Dasein if one 
does se in the sense of ‘Experiences’ of a subject—Exßeriences which are 
‘also’ present-sr-hand. The possib:tity that this horizon ior the question 
should be the ::ominant one is grounded in the irresoluteness which goes 
to make up tk essence of the Selr’s in-constancy. 

We have ti; pointed out the source of the question of the ‘connected- 
ness’ of Daei:. in the sense of the unity with which Experiences are 
linked togethc : between birth and death. At the same time, the origin of 
this question zetrays that it is an inappropriate one if we are aiming at a 
primordial existential Interpretation of Dasein’s totality of historizing. On 
the other hand, despite the predominance of this ‘natural’ horizon for such 
questions, it becomes explicable why Dasein’s authentic historicality— 
fate and repetition—looks as if it, least of all, could supply the phenomenal 
basis for bringing into the shape of an ontologically grounded problem 
what is at bottom intended in the question of the ‘connectedness’ of life. 

This quvstion does not ask how Dasein gains such a unity of connected- 
ness that the sequence of ‘Experiences’ which has ensued and is still 
ensuing can subsequently be linked together; it asks rather in which of its 
own kinds of Being Dasein loses itself in such a manner! that it must, as it were, 
only subsequently pull itself together out of its dispersal, and think up for itself a 
unity in which that “together” ts embraced. Our lostness in the “they” and in 
the world-historical has earlier been revealed as a fleeing in the face of 
death. Such fleeing makes manifest that Being-towards-death is a basic 
attribute of care. Anticipatory resoluteness brings this Being-towards- 
death into authentic existence. The historizing of this resoluteness, 
however, is the repetition of the heritage of possibilities by handing these 
down to oneself in anticipation; and we have Interpreted this historizing 
as authentic historicality. Is perhaps the whole of existence stretched 
along in this historicality in a way which is primordial and not lost, and 
which has no need of connectedness? The Self’s resoluteness against the 
inconstancy of distraction, is in itself a steadiness which has been stretched along 
—the steadiness with which Dasein as fate ‘incorporates’ into its existence 
birth and death and their ‘between’, and holds them as thus ‘incorpor- 
ated’, so that in such constancy Dasein is indeed in a moment of vision for 
what is world-historical in its current Situation.” In the fateful repetition 

1‘... verliert es sich so... The older e.!itions have ‘. . . verliert des sich nicht so...’ 

8 ‘Die Entschlossenheit des Selbst gegen die Unständigkeit der Zerstreuung ist in sich 
selbst die erstreckte Stähgkeit, in der das Dasein als Schicksal Geburt und Tod in ihr 


“Zwischen” in seine Existenz “einbezogen’’ hält, so zwar, dass es in solcher Standigkeit 
augenblicklich ist für das Welt-geschichtliche seiner jeweiligen Situation.’ The noun 


YI. 5 Being and Time 443 
of possibilities that have been, Dasein brings itself back ‘immediately’— 
that is to say, in a way that is temporally ecstatical—to what already has 
been before it. But when its heritage is thus handed down to itself, its 
‘birth’ is caught up ints its existence in coming back from the possibility of 
death (the possibility which is not to be outstripped), if only so that this 
existence may accept the thrownness of its own “there” in a way which is 
more free from Ulusion.! 

Resoluteness constitutes the loyalty of existence to its own Self. As 
resoluteness which is ready for anxiety, this loyalty is at the same time a 
possible way of revering the sole authority which a free existing can have 
—of revering the repeatable possibilities of existence. Resoluteness would 
be misunderstood ontologically if one were to suppose that it would be 
actual as ‘Experience’ only as long as the ‘act’ of resolving ‘lasts’. In 
resoluteness lies the existentiell constancy which, by its very essence, has 
already anticipated [vorweggenommen] every possible moment of vision 
that may arise from it. As fate, resoluteness is freedom to give up some 
definite resolution, and to give it up in accordance with the demands of 
some possible Situation or other. The steadiness of existence is not inter- 
rupted thereby but confirmed in the moment of vision. This steadiness is 
not first formed either through or by the adjoining of ‘moments’ one to 
another; but these arise from the temporality of that repetition which is 
futurally in the process-of-having-been—a temporality which has already 
been stretched along. 

In inauthentic historicality, on the other hand, the way in which fate 
has been primordially stretched along has been hidden. With the incon- 
stancy of the they-self Dasein makes present its ‘today’. In awaiting the 
next new thing, it has already forgotten the old one. The “‘they’”’ evades 
choice. Blind for possibilities, it cannot repeat what has been, but only 
retains and receives the ‘actual’ that is left over, the world-historical that 
has been, the leavings, and the information about them that is present- 
at-hand. Lost in the making present of the “today”, it understands the 
‘past’ in terms of the ‘Present’. On the other hand, the temporality of 
authentic historicality, as the moment of vision of anticipatory repetition, 


**Statigkeit’, which we here translate as ‘steadiness’, may mean either ‘continuity’ or 
nenn Heidegger may have both senses in mind. Cf. our note 9, P- 475, H. 423 


1 ‘Mit diesem Sichüberliefern des Erbes aber ist dann die “Geburt” im Zurückkommen 
aus der unüberholbaren Möglichkeit des Todes in die Existent eingeholt, damit diese 
freilich nur die Geworfenheit des eigenen Da illusionsfreier hinnehme.’ Here as in H. 307 
. and perhaps i in H. 302, Heidegger seems to be exploiting the double meaning of ‘cin- 
holen’ as “to bring in’ and “to catch up with’. Dasein Dasein ‘brings’ its birth ‘into’ its existence 
by accepting its heritage of possibilities, and in this way it ‘catches up with it’. Thus while 
ae cannot be outstripped (‘überholt’), birth can at least be ‘caught up with’ (‘einge- 

ole’ 


r 


392 


444 Being and Time II. 5 


deprives the “today” of its character as present,! and weans one from the 
conventionalities of the “they”. When, however, one’s existence is 
inäuthentically historical, it is loaded down with the legacy of a ‘past’ 
which has become unrecognizable, and it seeks the modern. But when 
historicality is authentic, it understands history as the ‘recurrence’ of the 
possible, and knows that a possibility will recur only if existence is open 
for it fatefully, in a moment of vision, in resolute repetition. 

The existential Interpretation of Dasein’s historicality is constantly 
getting eclipsed unawares. The obscurities are all the harder to dispel when 
we have not disentangled the possible dimensions of the appropriate 
inquiry, and when everything is haunted by the enigma of Being, and, as 
has now been made plain, by that of motion.” Nevertheless, we may venture 
a projection of the ontological genesis of historiology as a science in terms 
of Dasein’s historicality. This projection will serve to prepare us for the 
clarification of the task of destroying the history of philosophy historio- 
logically—a clarification which is to be accomplished in what follows.* 


T 76. The Existential Source of Historiology in Dasein’s Historicality. 


We need not discuss the Fact that historiology, like any science, is, as 
a kind of Being of Dasein, factically ‘dependent’ at any time on the 
‘prevailing world-view’. Beyond this, we must inquire into the ontological 
possibility of how the sciences have their source in Dasein’s state of Being. 
This source is still not very transparent. In the context which lies before 
us, our analysis will acquaint us in outline with the existential source of 
historiology only to the extent of bringing still more plainly to light the 
historicality of Dasein and the fact that this historicality is rooted in 
temporality. 

If Dasein’s Being is in principle historical, then every factical science is 
always manifestly in the grip of this historizing. But historiology still has 
Dasein’s historicality as its presupposition in its own quite special way. 

This can be made plain, in the first instance, by the suggestion that 
historiology, as the science of Dasein’s history, must ‘presuppose’ as its 
possible ‘Object’ the entity which is primordially historical. But history must 
not only be, in order that a historiological object may become accessible; 
and historiological cognition is not only historical, as a historizing way in 
which Dasein comports itself. Whether the historiplogical disclosure of history 
is factically accomplished or not, its ontological structure is such that in itself 
this disclosure has its roots in the historicality of Dasein. This is the connection 
we have in view when we talk of Dec S historicality as the existential 


1°... eine Entgegenwärtigung des Heute . 


2e, . und in allem das Rätsel des Seins ER wie jetzt deutlich wurde, der Bewegung 
sein Wesen treibt.’ 


Il. 5 Being and Time 445 
source of historiology. To cast light upon this connection signifies method- 
ologically that the idea of historiology must be projected ontologically in 
terms of Dasein’s historicality. The issue here is not one of ‘abstracting’ 
the concept of historiology from the way something is factically done in 
the sciences today, nor is it one of assimilating it to anything of this sort. 
For what guarantee dowe have in principle that such a factical procedure 
will indeed be properly representative of historiology in its primordial and 
authentic possibilities ? And even if this should turn out to be the case— we 
shall hold back from any decision about this—then the concept could be 
‘discovered’ in the Fact only by using the clue provided by the idea of 
historiology as one which we have already understood. On the other 
hand, the existential idea of historiology is not given a higher justification 
by having the historian affirm that his factical behaviour is in agreement 
with it. Nor does the idea become ‘false’ if he disputes any such agreement. 

The idea of historiology as a science implies that the disclosure of 
historical entities is what it has seized upon as its own task. Every science 
is constituted primarily by thematizing. That which is familiar pre- 
scientifically in Dasein as disclosed Being-in-the-world, gets projected 
upon the Being which is specific to it. With this projection, the realm of 
entities is bounded off. The ways of access to them get ‘managed’ method- 
ologically, and the conceptual structure for interpreting them is outlined. 
If we may postpone the question of whether a ‘history of the Present’ is 
possible, and assign [zuweisen] to historiology the task of disclosing the 
‘past’, then the historiological thematizing of history is possible only if, in 
general, the ‘past’ has in each case already been disclosed. Quite apart 
from the question of whether sufficient sources are available for the 
historiological envisagement of the past, the way to it must in general be 
open if we are to go back to it historiologically. It is by no means patent 
that anything of the sort is the case, or how this is possible. 

But in so far as Dasein’s Being is historical—that is to say, in so far as by 
reason of its ecstatico-horizonal temporality it is open in its character of 
“having-been”—the way is in genera! prepared for such thematizing of 
the ‘past’ as can be accomplished in existence. And because Dasein, and 
only Dasein, is primordially historicai, that whick historiological thematiz- 
ing presents as a possible object for research, must havc the kind of Being 
of Dasein which has-been-there. Along with any facticai 1 2:.in as Being-in- 
the-world, there zs also, in each case, world-history. 37 "> sein is there no 
longer, then the world too is somethi: ~ that has-be«: t. re. This is not 
in conflict with the fact that, all the =: =. what was n. nerly ready-to- 
hand within-the-world does not yet pass away, but becomes something 
that one can, in a Present, come across ‘historiologically’ as something 


393 


394 


392 


446 Being and Time 11.5 
which has not passed away and which belongs to the -orid that has-been- 
there. 

Remains, monuments, and records that are stil jsccsent-at-hand, are 
possible ‘material’ for the concrete disclosure of ^: Pasein which has- 
been-there. Such things can turn into Atstoriological * v:torial only because, 
in accordance with their own kind of Being, they vr: a world-historical 
character. And they become such material only wins: they have been 
understood in advance with regard to their withi.-tae-world-ness. The 
world that has already been projected is given x © Tite character by 
way of an Interpretation of the world-historica! 1: o we have ‘re 
ceived’. Our going back to ‘the past’ does not first 5:1. iis start from: he 
ee sifting, and securing of such meters. ; these activities pre- 

suppose historical Being towards the Dasein that h1:been-tners—that 15 to 
say’, they presuppose the historicality of the historia v3 er isteace. This x the 
ccistential foundation for historiology as a stiewe. even for Hs most 
trivial and ‘mechanical’ procedures. 

if histerielogy is rooted in historicalty in cha wrner, chen it is Iron: 
hes that we must determine what the object of trucriotcey ‘really’ is. 
The delimitation of the primordial theme of histor: ogy wil have ta be 
carried through in conformity with the characte: -7e ahente bistoricalty 
and its disclosure of “what-has-bren-tfere”---that iso say, in conformit: 
wih repetition as this disciosure. in reonntion ibe Oo aehint has-been. 
there is ee in its authean. accsthids lach nas been. Ihs 
wir he at historiology from a Historical tote ore igmuiies chat 
n Inking ac our primary there the bis ce aloes Lowe are projechine 
the Dasein which kas- eher USON ts QUIUBISET iodi ity of existence. 
Ty bstoviciony thus to have try. Sossible for ite eo © Bs not its whole 
‘meaning point solely to the ‘facts—te how semering has factually 


am 2 
re RE 


Rint what does ic signify to sav that Dasein is Demunal’? If Dasein is 
rene” nctyaa orks in existence, then ne fastrabe’ ia constituted pre- 
caciy by its regoh ie protection of aes upon a cir es potentiality-for- 
Bens, But ifse, that which authentically has-been thore ‘factually’ is the 
“yoomie possibuty in which fate, Fr haa and w irkd-histocy have been 
aial determined. Pecause in each case existence is only as factically 

rows, historiclser will disclose the quiet force of the possible with 
aes metraticn ae more simply and the more concretely havıng- 
“tr t-in--ae-world is understood in terms of its possibility, and ‘only’ 
z ssen’:d as such. 

If h` toriology, which itself arises from authentic historicality, reveals 
ty rep tition the Dasein which has-been-there and reveals it in its 


< 


Il. 5 Betng and Time 447 
possibility, then historiology has already made manifest the ‘universal’ in 
the once-for-all. The question of whether the object of historiology is just 
to put once-for-all ‘individual’ events into a series, or whether it also has 
‘laws’ as its objects, is one that is radically mistaken. The theme of 
historiology is neither that which has happened just once for all nor 
something universal that floats above it, but the possibility which has 
been factically existent. This possibility does not get repeated as such— 
that is to say, understood in an authentically historiological way—if it 
becomes perverted into the colourlessness of a supratemporal model. 
Only by historicality which is factical and authentic can the history of 
what has-been-there, as a resolute fate, be disclosed in such a manner that 
in repetition the ‘force’ of the possible gets struck home into one’s factical 
existence—in other words, that it comes towards that existence in its 
futural character. The historicality of unhistoriological Dasein does not 
take its departure from the ‘Present’ and from what is ‘actual’ only today, 
in order to grope its way back from there to something that is past; and 
neither does historiology. Even hisioriological disclosure temporalizes itself 
in terms of che future. The ‘selection’ of what is to become a possible 
object for historiology has already been met with in the factical existentiell 
choice of Dasein’s historicality, in which historiology first of all arises, anc! 
in which alone it ts. 

The historiological disclosure of the ‘past’ is baserı on fateful repetition, 
and is so far from ‘subjective’ that it alone guarantees the ‘Objectivity’ 
of historiology. For the Objectivity of a science is regulated primarily in 
terms of whether that science can confrent us with the entity which 
beiongs to it as its therne, and can bring it, uncovered in the primordiality 
of its Being, to our understanding. In no science are the ‘universal validity’ 
of standards and the claims to ‘universality’ which the “they” ani its 
common sense demand, less possible as criteria of ‘truth’ than in authentic 
historiology. 

Only because in each case the central theme ci historiology is the 
possbiity of existence which has-been-thers:, anc because the latter exist: 
factiialy in. way which is woriienistor ss, ve: a demand of itself 02! 


ete | COTS Oar u... OTM INEXOL A Tay a fe an haw N ieee. = Accorcrngiy . I 

EEE ee as sos A Slang, en Na a A in 2 ke 
sesearch Cs jacuzal has many tranches shoa iier fo: tts object the haen 
- ca ee E ro aes rn Pas) la oes ee an -. eyz i g 3 ‘ ysa oe _ 
ofeguincecrt, f work, of culture, of the «puro, ane of ideas. As leading 


sch down, history is, in itself, at the sans oars and in each case alway» 
in an inter csetedness which beiongs to ti. giv: which has a history of sis 


own; so for the most part it is omy trough traditional history that 


1 ‘Weder das nur einmalig Geschehene noch ein darüber schwebendes Allgemeincs 
ist ihr Therna, sondern die faktisch existent gewesene Möglichkeit.’ 


396 


397 


448 Being and Time IT. 5 


historiology penetrates to what has-been-there itself. This is why concrete 
historiological research can, in each case, maintain itself in varying close- 
ness to its authentic theme. If the historian ‘throws’ himself straightway 
into the ‘world-view’ of an era, he has not thus proved as yet that he 
understands his object in an authentically historical way, and not just 
‘aesthetically’, And on the other hand, the existence of a historian who 
‘only’ edits sources, may be characterized by a historicality which is 
authentic. 

Thus the very prevalence of a differentiated interest even in the most 
remote and primitive cultures, is in itself no proof of the authentic his- 
toricality of a ‘time’. In the end, the emergence of a problem of ‘historicism’? 
is the clearest symptom that historiology endeavours to alienate Dasein 
from its authentic historicality. Such historicality does not necessarily 
require historiology. It is not the case that unhistoriological eras as such 
are unhistorical also. 

The possibility that historiology in general can either be ‘used’ ‘for 
one’s life’ or ‘abused’ in it, is grounded on the fact that one’s life is his- 
torical in the roots of its Being, and that therefore, as factically existing, 
one has in each case made one’s decision for authentic or inauthentic 
historicality. Nietzsche recognized what was essential as to the ‘use and 
abuse of historiology for life’ in the second of his studies ‘‘out of season” 
(1874), and said it unequivocally and penetratingly. He distinguished 
three kinds of historiology—the monumental, the antiquarian, and the 
critical—without explicitly pointing out the necessity of this triad or the 
ground of its unity. The threefold character of historiology is adumbrated in the 
historicality of Dasein. At the same time, this historicality enables us to 
understand to what extent these three possibilities must be united factic- 
ally and concretely in any historiology which is authentic. Nietzsche’s 
division is not accidental. The beginning of his ‘study’ allows us to suppose 
that he understood more than he has made known to us. 

As historical, Dasein is possible only by reason of its temporality, and 
temporality temporalizes itself in the ecstatico-horizonal unity of its 
raptures. Dasein exists authentically as futural in resolutely disclosing a 
possibility which it has chosen. Coming back resolutely to itself, it is, by 
repetition, open for the ‘monumental’ possibilities of human existence. 
The historiology which arises from such historicality is ‘monumental’. As 
in the process of having been, Dasein has been delivered over to its 
thrownness, When the possible is made one’s own by repetition, there is 
adumbrated at the same time the possibility of reverently preserving the 
existence that has-been-there, in which the possibility seized upon has 
become manifest. Thus authentic historiology, as monumental, is 


II. 5 Being and Time 449 
‘antiquarian’ too. Dasein temporalizes itselfin the way the future and having 
been are united in the Present. The Present discloses the “today” authen- 
tically, and of course as the moment of vision. But in so far as this “today” 
has been interpreted in terms of understanding a possibility of existence 
which has been seized upon—an understanding which is repetitive in 
a futural manner—authentic historiology becomes a way in which the 
“today” gets deprived of its character as present; in other words, it 
becomes a way of painfully detaching oneself from the falling publicness 
of the “today”. As authentic, the historiology which is both monumental 
and antiquarian is necessarily a critique of the ‘Present’. Authentic 
historicality is the foundation for the possibility of uniting these three 
ways of historiology. But the ground on which authentic historiology is 
founded is temporality as the existential meaning of the Being of care. 

The existential-historical source of historiology may be presented 
concretely by analysing the thematization which 1s constitutive for this 
‚science. In historiological thematizing, the main point is the cultivation 
of the hermeneutical Situation which—once the historically existent 
Dasein has made its resolution—opens itself to the repetitive disclosure of 
what has-been-there. The possibility and the structure of kistoriological 
truth are to be expounded in terms of the authentic disclosedness (‘truth’) of 
historical existence. But since the basic concepts of the historiological sciences 
—whether they pertain to the Objects of these sciences or to the way in 
which these are treated—are concepts of existence, the theory of the 
"humane science presupposes an existential Interpretation which has as 
its theme the historicality of Dasein. Such an Interpretation is the constant 
goal to which the researches of Wilhelm Dilthey seek to bring us closer, 
and which gets illumined in a more penetrating fashion by the ideas of 
Count Yorck von Wartenburg. | 


177. The Connection of the Foregoing Exposition of the Problem of Historwality 
‚with the Researches of Wilhelm Dilthey and the Ideas of Count Yorck! 

The analysis of the problem of history which we have just carried 
through has arisen in the process of appropriating the labours of Dilthey. 
It has been corroborated and at the same time strengthened, by the 
theses of Count Yorck, which are found scattered through his letters to 
him.=!! 

The image of Dilthey which is still widely disseminated today is thar of 
the ‘sensitive’ interpreter of the history of the spirit, especially the history 

1 In this section we have relaxed some of our usual conventions in view of the special 
stylistic character of the quotations from Count Yorck and Heidegger's own minor 


inconsistencies in punctuation. In particular, we shall now translate ‘Historie’ as ‘History’ 
with a capital ‘H’, rather than as ‘historiology.’ 


P 


398 


un 
& 


450 Being and Time IT. 5 


of literature, who ‘also’ endeavours to distinguish between the natural and ' 
the humane sciences, thereby assigning [zuweist] a distinctive role to the 

history of the latter group and likewise to ‘psychology’, then allowing the 
whole to merge together in a relativistic ‘philosophy of life’. Considered 

superficially, this sketch is ‘correct’. But the ‘substance’ eludes it, and it 

covers up more than it reveals. 

We may divide Dilthey’s researches schematically into three domains:* 
studies on the theory of the humane sciences, and the distinction between 
these and the natural sciences; researches into the history of the sciences of 
man, society, and the state; endeavours towards a psychology in which the 
‘whole fact of man’ is to be presented. Investigations in the theory of 
science, in historical science, and in psychological hermeneutics are con- 
stantly permeating and intersecting each other. Where any one point of 
view predominates, the others are the motives and the means. What looks 
like disunity and an unsure, ‘haphazard’ way of ‘trying things out’, is an 
elemental restlessness, the one goal of which is to understand ‘life’ philo- 
sophically and to secure for this understanding a hermeneutical founda- 
tion in terms of ‘life itself’. Everything centres in psychciogy, in which 
‘life’ is to be understood in the historical context of its deveiopinert aud 
its effects, and wacderstood as the way in wiich man, as che possibi vazest 
of the humane sciences, and especialy as the vot of these seisraccs, is. 
Hermeneutics js the way this understandiag erightens itself; iiis also tre 
methodology vi historiology, thougn only in a derivative form. 

In the contemporaneous discussions, Diichey’s own researches for laying 
the basis tor the humane sciences were forced one-sidedly into the field 
of the theory of science; and it was of course with a regard for such dis- 
cussions that his publications wefe often oriented in this direction. But the 
‘logic of the humane sciences’ was by no means central for him—no more 
than he was striving in his ‘psychology’ ‘merely’ to make improvements in 
the positive science of the psychical. 

Dilthey’s friend, Count Yorck, gives unambiguous expression to Dil- 
they’s ownmost ph uaa cass tendency in ine communications between 
them, when he aliudes to ‘our common teest in undersianding historicaitty 
(italicized by the author}. Diltney’s resea:ches are only now becoming 
accessible in their full scope; if we are to inäke chem our own, we need the 
steadiness and concreteness of coming to erms with them ın principle. 
This not the place {Ort] for discussing in detail the problems which moved 
him, or how he was moved by them.*!¥ We stall, however, describe in a 
provisional way some of Count Yorck’s central ideas, by selecting char- 
acteristic passages from the letters. 

In these communications, Yorck’s own tendency is brought to life by 


... 


| 


I. 5 Being and Time 451 
' the labours of Dilthey and his ways of formulating questions, and it shows 
itself when Yorck takes his stand as to the tasks of the discipline which is 
to lay the basis—analytical psychology. On Dilthey’s Academy paper, 
‘Ideen über eine beschreibende und zergliedernde Psycholgie’ (1894), he 
writes: ‘It gets firmly laid down that the consideration of the Self is the 
primary means of knowing, and that the primary procedure of knowing 
is analysis. From this standpoint principles get formulated which are 
verified by their own findings. No progress is made towards critically 
breaking down constructive psychology and its assumptions, or towards ex- 
plaining it and thus refuting it from within’ (Briefwechsel, p. 177). ‘.. . your 
disregard for breaking things down critically (that is, for demonstrat- 
ing their provenience psychologically, and carrying this out trenchantly 
in detai!) is connected, in my opinion, with your conception of the theory 
of knowledge and with the position which you assign [zuwcisen] to it’ 
(p. 177). “... only a theory of knowledge gives the explanation for this 
inapplicabiaty (che fact of ít has been laid down and made plain). It has 
to render account for tne adequacy of scientific methods; it has to provide 
the growuis ice a doctrine of method, instead of having its methods taken 
~-ataveriurs, (rust say-—from particular areas’ (pp. 179 f.). 

At better: Yorck is demandıng a logic tnat shall stride ahead of the 
scienci: ood guile them, as did the logic of Plato and Arisiotle; and this 
demand :aciudes the task of working out, positively ard radically, the 
ditfesoni catezorial structures of those entities which are Nature and of 
thos: which are history (Dasein). Yorck finds that Laithey’s investigations 
‘pui ton cattle stress on differentiation generica:ty oetween the uniical and ihe His- 
torical’ {p. 191, italicized by the author). ‘In partucular, the proccdure cf 
comparison is ciaımeü to be the method for the humane sciences. Here I 
disagree with you... Comparison is always acsihetic, and always adheres 
to the pattern of things. Windelband assigns jweist . . . zu] patterns to 
history. Your concept of the type is an entire:y inward one. Here itis a 400 
matter of characteristics, not of patterns. asr Windelband, history is a 
series cf sutures, of individual patterns— ar: cfoihetic Gemand. To the 


naturai scieniisi, there remains, beside his © wiwt, es... kind of human 
tranquillizer, only aesthetic enjoyment. Bui ooo cukocption of history 


is that of a nexus of forces, of unities of foice, wo wich ine category of 

“pattern” is to be applicable only by a kina ur transference’ (p. 193). 

- In terms of his sure instinct for ‘differentiating between the ontical and 
the Historical’, Yorck knew how strongly traditiun“l historical research 
still maintains itself in ‘purely ocular ways of ascertaining’ (p. 192), 
which are aimed at the corporeal and at that which has pattern. 

‘Ranke is a great ocularist, for whom things that have vanished can 


401 


452 Being and Time Il. 5 
never become actualities ... Ranke’s whole tribe also provides the explana- 
tion for the way the material of history has been restricted to the political. 
Only the political is dramatic’ (p.. 60). ‘The modifications which the 
course of time has brought appear unessential to me, and I should like to 
appraise this very differently. For instance, I regard the so-called Histori- 
cal school as a mere sidestream ‘within the same river-bed, and as repre- 
senting only one branch of an old and thoroughgoing opposition. The 
name is somewhat deceptive. That school was by no means a Historical one 
(italicized by the author), but an antiquarian one, construing things 
aesthetically, while the great dominating activity was one of mechanical 
construction. Hence what it contributed methodologically—to the method 
of rationality—was only a general feeling’ (pp. 68 f.). 

‘The genuine Philologus—he conceives of History as a cabinet of anti- 
quities.? Where nothing is palpable—whither one has been guided only by 
a living psychical transposition—-these gentlemen never come. At heart 
they are natural scientists, and they become sceptics all the more because 
experimentation is lacking. We must keep wholly aloof from all such 
rubbish, for instance, as how often Plato was in Magna Graecia or Syra- 
cuse. On this nothing vital depends, This superficial affectation which I 
have seen through critically, winds up at last with a big question-mark 
and is put to shame by the great Realities of Homer, Plato, and the New 
Testament. Everything that is actually Real becomes a mere phantom 
when one considers it as a “Thing in itself”’—-when it does not get Exper- 
ienced’ (p. 61). “These “‘scientists’’ stand over against the powers of the 
times like the over-refined French society of the revolutionary period. 
Here as there, formalism, the cult of the form; the defining of relationship 
is the last word in wisdom. Naturally, thought which runs in this direction 
has its own history, which, I suppose, is still unwritten. The groundless- 
ness of such thinking and of any belief in it (and such thinking, epistemo- 
logically considered, is a metaphysical attitude) is a Historical product’ 
(p. 39). ‘It seems to me that the ground-swells evoked by the principle of 
eccentricity,? which led to a new era more than four hundred years ago, 
have become exceedingly broad and flat; that our knowledge has pro- 
gressed to the point of cancelling itself out; that man has withdrawn so 
far from himself that he no longer sees himself at all. The “modern man” 
—that is to say, the post-Renaissance man—is ready for burial’ (p. 83). On 
the other hand, ‘‘All History that is truly alive and not just reflecting a 
tinge of life, is a critique’ (p. 19). ‘But historical knowledge is, for the best 


1 Yorck is here referring to Karl Friedrich Hermann, whose Geschichte und System der 
platonischen Philosophie (Heidelberg, 1839) he has been reading. 

3 Presumably the eccentricity of the planetary motions as described by Kepler, follow- 
ing on the work of Copernicus. 


IT. 5 Being and Time 453 
part, knowledge of the hidden sources’ (p. 109). ‘With history, what makes 
a spectacle and catches the eye is not the main thing. The nerves are 
invisible, just as the essentials in general are invisible. While it is said that 
‘Gf you were quiet, you would be strong”, the variant is also true that 
“if you are quiet, you will perceive—that is, understand” ’ (p. 26). ‘And 
then I enjoy the quietude of soliloquizing and communing with the spirit 
of history. This spirit is one who did not appear to Faust in his study, or 
to Master Goethe either. But they would have felt no alarm in making 
way for him, however grave and compelling such an apparition might be. 
For he is brotherly, akin to us in another and deeper sense than are the 
denizens of bush and field. These exertions are like Jacob’s wrestling— 
a sure gain for the wrestler himself. Indeed this is what matters first of ail’ 
(p. 133). j 

Yorck gained his clear insight into the basic character of history as 
‘virtuality’ from his knowledge of the character of the Being which human 
Dasein itself possesses, not from the Objects of historical study, as a 
theory of science would demand. ‘The entire psycho-physical datum is 
not one that zs (Here “Being” equals the Being-present-at-hand of Nature. 
—Author’s remark) but one that lives; this is the germinal point of his- 
toricality.! And if the consideration of the Self is directed not at an 
abstract “I” but at the fulness of my Self, it will find me Historically 
determined, just as physics knows me as cosmically determined. Just as I 
am Nature, so I am history...’ (p. 71). And Yorck, who saw through all 
bogus ‘defining of relationships’ and ‘groundless’ relativisms, did not 
hesitate to draw the final conclusion from his insight into the historicality 
of Dasein. ‘But, on the other hand, in view of the inward historicality of 
self-consciousness, a systematic that is divorced from History is methodo- 
logically inadequate. Just as physiology cannot be studied in abstraction 
from physics, neither can philosophy from historicality—especially if it is 
a critical philosophy. Behaviour and historicality are like breathing and 
atmospheric pressure; and—this may sound rather paradoxical—it seems 
to me methodologically like a residue from metaphysics not to historicize 
one’s philosophizing’ (p. 69). ‘Because to philosophize is to live, there is, 
in my opinion (do not be alarmed!), a philosophy of history—but who 
would be able to write it? Certainly it is not the sort of thing it has hither- 
to been taken to be, or the sort that has so far been attempted; you have 
declared yourself incontrovertibly against all that. Up till now, the ques- 
tion has been formulated in a way which is false, even impossible; but 
this is not the only way of formulating it. Thus there is no longer any 


1 Yorck’s text reads as follows: ‘Das die gesammte psychophysische Gegebenheit nicht 
ist sondern lebt, ist der Keimpunkt der Geschichtlichkeit’. Heidegger plausibly changes 
‘Das’ to‘... dasa’ in the earlier editions, to ‘Dass’ in the later ones, 


4.02 


403 


454 Being and Time il, 5 
actual philosophizing which would not be Historical. The separation 

between systematic philosophy and Historical presentation is essentially 
incorrect” (p. 251). "That a science can become practical is now, of course, 
the real basis for its justification. But the mathematical praxis is not the 

only one. The practical aim of our standpoint is one that is pedagogical 

in the broadest and deepest sense of the word. Such an aim is the soul 

of all true philosophy, and the truth of Plato and Aristotle’ (pp. 42 £)” 
‘You know my views on the possibility of ethics as a science. In spite of 
that, this can always be done a little better. For whom are such books 

really written ? Registries about registries! The only thing worthy of notice 

is what drives them to come from physics to ethics’ (p. 73). ‘If philosophy 

is conceived as a manifestation of life, and not as the coughing up of a 

baseless kind of thinking (and such thinking appears baseless because 

one’s glance gets turned away, from the basis of consciousness), then one’s 

task is as meagre in its results as it is complicated and arduous in the 

obtaining of them. Freedom from prejudice is what it presupposes, and 

such freedom is hard to gain’ (p. 250). 

It is plain from Yorck’s allusion to the kind of difficulty met with in 
such investigations, that he himself was already on the way to bringing 
within our grasp categorially the Historical as opposed to the ontical 
(ocular), and to raising up ‘life’ into the kind of scientific understanding 
that is appropriate to it. The aesthetico-mechanistic way of thinking? 
‘finds verbal expression more easily than does an analysis that goes behind 
intuition, and this can be explained by the wide extent to which words 
have their provenience in the ocular .. . On the other hand, that which 
penetratcs into the basis of vitality eludes an exoteric presentation; hence 
all its terminology is symbolic and ineluctable, not intelligible to all. 
Because philosophical thinking is of a special kind, its linguistic expression 
has a special character’ (pp. 70 f.). “But you are acquainted with my 
liking for paradox, which I justify by saying that paradoxicality is a mark 
of truth, and that the communis opinio is nowhere in the truth, but is like 
an elemental precipitate of a halfway understanding which makes generali- 
zations; in its relationship to truth it is like the sulphurous fumes which 
the lightning leaves behind. Truth is never an element. To dissolve 
elemental public opinion, and, as far as possible, to make possible the 
moulding of individuality in seeing and looking, would be a pedagogical 


1 Yorck is here discussing Lotze and Fechner, and suggestiong the cheir ‘rare talent for 
a Arge was abetted by their ‘aesthetico-mechanistic way of thi iking’, as Heidegger 

ls it. The reader who is puzzled by the way Yorck lumps togethar the ‘aesthetic’, the 
‘mechanistic’, and the ‘intuitive’, should bear in mind that here the words ‘aesthetic’ and 
‘intuition’ are used in the familiar Kantian sense of immediate se experience, 
that Yorck thinks of ‘mechanism’ as falling entirely within the ‘horizon’ of such ex- 
pericnce without penetrating beyond it. 


IT. 5 Being and Tims 455 
task for the state. Then, instead of a so-called public conscience—instead 
of this radical externalization—individual consciences—that is to say, 
consciences—would again become powerful’ (pp. 249 f.). 

If one has an interest in understanding historicality, one is brought to 
the task of working out a ‘generic differentiation between the onüca! au! 
the Historical’. The fundamental air of the ‘phiios: pty of dijet is tied up with 
this. Nevertheless, the formulation of the question aceds to be radicalized 
in principle. How are we to gèt historicality into cur grasp philosophically 
as distingu:shed from the ontical, and conceive it ‘categorially’, except by 
bringing both the ‘ontical’ and the ‘Historical’ into a more primordial unity, 
so that they can be compared and distinguished? But that is possible only if 
we attain the following insights: (1) that the question of historicality is an 
ontological question about the state of Being of historical entities; (2) that 
the question of the ontical is the ontological question of the state of Being 
of entities other than Dasein— of what is present-at-hand in the widest 
sense; (3) that the ontical is only one domain of entities. The idea of Being 
embraces both the ‘ontical’ and the ‘Historical’. It is thts zdea which must 
let itself be ‘generically differentiated’. 

It is not by chance that Yorck calls those entities which are not his- 
torical, simply the ““ontical”. This just reflects the unbroken dominion of 
the traditional ontology, which, as derived from the ancient way of for- 
mulating the question of Being, narrows down the ontological problematic 
in principle and holds it fact. The problem of differentiating between the 
ontical and the Historical cannot be worked out as a problem for research 
unless we have made sure in advance what is the clue to it, by clarifying, through 
fundamental ontology, the question of the meaning of Being in general.*v 
Thus it becomes plain in what sense the preparatory existential-temporal 
analytic of Dasein is resolved to foster the spirit of Count Yorck in the 
service of Dilthey’s work. 


1‘ *Lebensphilosophie” °, The word is italicized only in the later editions. 


404 


Vi 


TEMPORALITY AND WITHIN-TIME-NESS AS THE 
SOURCE OF THE ORDINARY CONCEPTION OF TIME 


{ 78. The Incompleteness of the Foregotng Temporal Analysis of Dasein 

To demonstrate that temporality is constitutive for Dasein’s Being and 
how it is thus constitutive, we have shown that historicality, as a state-of- 
Being which belongs to existence, is ‘at bottom’ temporality. We have 
carried through our Interpretation of the temporal character of history 
without regard for the ‘fact’ that all historizing runs its course ‘in time’. 
Factically, in the everyday understanding of Dasein, all history is known 
merely as that which happens ‘within-time’; but throughout the course of 
our existential-temporal analysis of historicality, this understanding has 
been ruled out of order. If the existential analytic is to make Dasein 
ontologically transparent in its very facticity, then the factical ‘ontico- 
temporal’ interpretation of history must also be explicitly given its due. It 
is all the more necessary that the time ‘in which’ entities are encountered 
should be analysed in principle, since not only history but natural processes 
too are determined ‘by time’. But still more elemental than the circum- 
stance that the ‘time factor’ is one that occurs in the sciences of history and 
Nature, is the Fact that before Dasein does any thematical research, it 
‘reckons with time’ and regulates itself according to it. And here again what 
remains decisive is Dasein’s way of ‘reckoning with its time’—a way of 
reckoning which precedes any use of measuring equipment by which 
time can be determined. The reckoning is prior to such equipment, and is 
what makes anything like the use of clocks possible at all. 

Inits factical existence, any particular Dasein either ‘has the time’ or ‘does 
not have it’. It either ‘takes time’ for something or ‘cannot allow any time 
for it’. Why does Dasein ‘take time’, and why can it ‘lose’ it? Where does 
it take time from? How is this time related to Dasein’s temporality? 

Factical Dasein takes time into its reckoning, without any existential 
understanding of temporality. Reckoning with time is an elemental kind 
of behaviour which must be clarified before we turn to the question of 
what it means to say that entities are ‘in time’, All Dasein’s behaviour is 


II. 6 Being and Time 457 


to be Interpreted in terms of its Being—that is, in terms of temporality. 
We must show how Dasein as temporality temporalizes a kind of behaviour 
which relates itself to time by taking it into its reckoning. Thus our 
previous characterization of temporality is not only quite incomplete in 
that we have not paid attention to all the dimensions of this phenomenon; 
it also is defective in principle because something like world-time, in the 
rigorous sense of the existential-temporal conception of the world, belongs 
to temporality itself. We must come to understand how this is possible and 
why it is necessary, Thus the ‘time’ which is familiar to us in the ordinary 
way—the time ‘in which’ entities occur—will be illuminated, and so will 
the within-time-ness of these entities. 

Everyday Dasein, the Dasein which takes time, comes across time 
proximally in what it encounters within-the-world as ready-to-hand and 
present-at-hand. The time which it has thus ‘experienced’ is understood 
within the horizon of that way of understanding Being which is the closest 
for Dasein; that is, it is understood as something which is itself somehow 
present-at-hand. How and why Dasein comes to develop the ordinary 
conception of time, must be clarified in terms of its state-of-Being, as 
concerning itself with time—a state-of-Being with a temporal foundation. 
The ordinary conception of time owes its origin to a way in which 
primordial time has been levelled off. By demonstrating that this is the 
source of the ordinary conception, we shall justify our earlier Interpretation 
of temporality as primordial time. 

In the development of this ordinary conception, there is a eisarkahle 
vacillation as to whether the character to be attributed to time is ‘sub- 
jective’ or ‘Objective’. Where time is taken as being in itself, it gets 
allotted pre-eminently to the ‘soul’ notwithstanding. And whe:e it has the 
kind of character which belongs to ‘consciousness’, it still functions 
‘Objectively’. In Hegel’s Interpretation of time both possibilities are 
brought to the point where, in a certain manner, they cancel each other 
out. Hegel tries to define the connection between ‘time’ and ‘spirit’ in 
such a manner as to make intelligible why the spirit, as history, ‘falls into 
time’. We seem to be in accord with Hegel in the results of the Interpreta- 
tion we have given for Dasein’s temporality and for the way world-time 
belongs to it. But because our analysis differs in principle from his in its 
approach, and because its orientation is precisely the opposite of his in 
that it aims at fundamental ontology, a short presentation of Hegel’s way 
of taking the relationship between time and spirit may serve to make 
plain our existential-ontological Interpretation of Dasein’s temporality, 
of world-time. and of the source of the ordinary conception of time, and 
may settle this in a provisional manner. 


495 


406 


458 Being and Time 11.6 


Tize question of whether and how time has any ‘Being’, and of why and | 
in what sense we designate it as ‘being’, cannot be answered until we have | 
shown to what extent temporality itself, in the totality of its temporalizing 
makes it possible for us somehow 1° have an understanding of Being and 
address ouselves to entities. Our vuapter will be divided as follows! 
Daser. : .xaporality, and our conc x with time (Section 79); the time 
with which we concern ourselves, and wiihin-time-ness (Section 80); 
within-time-ness and the genesis >f the ordinary conception of time 
(Section 81}; a comparison of the existential-ontological connection of 
temporality, Dasein, and world-time, with Hegel’s way of taking the 
relation between time and spirit (Section 82); the existential-temporal 
analytic of Dasein and the question of fundamental ontology as to the 
meaning of Being in general (Section 83). 


T 979. Dessix’s Temporality, and our Concern with Time 

Dasein exists as an entity for which, in its Being, that Being is itself 
an issue. Essentially ahead of itself, it has projected itself upon its 
potentiality-for-Being before going on to any mere consideration of 
itself. In its projection it reveals itself as something which has been 
thrown, It has been thrownly abandoned to the ‘world’, and falls into 
it concernfully.! As care—that is, as existing in the unity of the pro- 
jection which has been fallingly thrown—this entity has been disclosed 

a “there”. As being with Others, it maintains itself in an average way 
of interpreting—a way which has been Articulated in discourse and 
expressed in language. Being-in-the-world has always expressed itself, and 
as Being alongside entities encountered within-the-world, it constantly 
expresses itself in addressing itself to the very object of its concern and 
discussing it. The concern of circumspective common sense is grounded 
in temporality—indeed in the mode of a making-present which retains 
and awaits. Such concern, as concernfully reckoning up, planning, 
preventing, or. taking precautions, always says (whether audibly or not) 
that something is to happen ‘then’, that something else is to be attended to 
‘beforehand’, that what has failed or eluded us ‘on that former occasion’ is 
something that we must ‘now’ make up for.* 

In the ‘then’, concern expresses itself as awaiting; in the ‘on that fees 
occasion’, as Taking; in the ‘now’, as making present. In the ‘then’—, 
but mostly unexpressed—lies the ‘now-not-yet’; that is to say, this is 

1 ‘Geworfen der “Welt” überlassen, verfällt es besorgend an sie.’ 

@*,.. “dann”’—soll das geschehen, “zuvor” —jenes seine Erledigung finden, “‘jezt”— 
das nachgeholt werden, was “damals” misslang und entging.’ Notice that the German 


‘dann’, unlike its English cognate ‘then’, is here thought of as having primarily a future 


reference. l 
\ 


11.6 Being and Time 459 


spoken in a making-present which is either awaitingly retentive or 
awaitingly forgetful. In the ‘on that former occasion’ lurks the ‘now-no- 
longer’, With this, retaining expresses itself as a making-present which 
awaits. The ‘then’ and the ‘on that former occasion’ are understood with 
regard to a ‘now’; that is to say, making present has a peculiar importance. 
Of course it always temporalizes itself in a unity with awaiting and retain- 
ing, even if these may take the modified form of a forgetting which does 
not await anything; in the mode of such forgetting, temporality ensnares 
itself in the Present, which, in making present, says pre-eminently ‘Now! 
Now! That which concern awaits as what is closest to it, gets addressed 
in the ‘forthwith’ [im ‘“‘sogleich’”]; what has been made proximally 
available or has been lost is addressed in the ‘just-now’ [im ‘“‘soeben’’]. 
The horizon for the retaining which expresses itself in the ‘on that former 
occasion’ is the ‘earlier’; the horizon for the ‘then’ is the ‘later on’ (‘that 
which is to come’); the hereon for the ‘now’ is the ‘today’. 

Every ‘then’, however, is, as such, a ‘then, when. . .’; every ‘on that 
former occasion’ is an ‘on that former occasion, when .. .’; every ‘now’ ig 
a ‘now that... .’.) The ‘now’, the ‘then’, and the ‘on that former occasion’ 
thus have a seemingly obvious relational structure which we call ‘‘datadil- 
uy” [Datierbarkeit]. Whether this datiag is factically done with respect to 

a ‘date’ on the calendar, must still be completely disregarded. Even withaut 
‘dates’ of this sort, the ‘now’, the ‘then’, and the ‘on that former occasion’ 
have been dated more or less definitely. And even if the dating is not made 
more definite, this does not mean that the structure of datability is missing 
or that it is just a matter of chance. 

Wherein is such databiltty grounded, and to what does it essentially belong? 
Can any more superfluous question indeed be raised? It is ‘well known’ 
that what we have in mind with the ‘now that...’ is a ‘point of time’. 
The ‘now’ is time. Incontestably, the ‘now that . . .’, the ‘then, when. ..’, 
and the ‘on that former occasion’ are things that we understand. And we 
also understand in a certain way that these are all connected with ‘time’, 
But that with this sort of thing one has ‘time’ itself in mind, and how this 
is possible, and what ‘time’ signifies—these are matters of which we have 
no conception in our ‘natural’ understanding of the ‘now’ and so forth. 
Is it indeed obvious, then, that something like the ‘then’, the ‘now’, and 
the ‘on that former occasion’, is something we ‘understand without further 
ado’, and ‘quite naturally’ bring to expression? Where do we get this ‘now 
_that...’? Have we found this sort of thing among entities yrithin-the- 
world—among those that are present-at-hand? Manifestly not. Then 


1 ‘Jedes “dann” aber ist als solches ein “dann, wann...”, jedes “damals” ein “damals, 
als... .”, jedes “jetzt’' ein “jetzt, da. 


407 


408 


460 Being and Time 1.6 


have we found it at all? Have we ever set ourselves to search for this and 
establish its character? We avail ourselves of it ‘at any time’ without: 
having taken it over explicitly, and we constantly make use of it even 
though we do not always make utterances about it. Even in the most 
trivial, offhand kind of everyday talk (‘It’s cold’, for instance) we also 
have in mind a ‘now that . . .’. Why is it that when Dasein addresses 
itself to the objects of its concern, it also expresses a ‘now that... .’, a 
‘then, when... .’, or an ‘on that former occasion, when . . .’, even though 
it does so mostly without uttering it? First, because in addressing itself to 
something interpretatively, it expresses itself too; that is to say, it expresses 
its Being alongside the ready-to-hand—a Being which understands circum- 
spectively and which uncovers the ready-to-hand and lets it be en- 
countered. And secondly, because this very addressing and discussing— 
which interprets itself also—is based upon a making-present and is possible 
only as such.! 

The making-present which awaits and retains, interprets itself. And this 
in turn is possible only because, as something which in itself is ecstatically 
open, it has in each case been disclosed to itself already and can be 
Articulated in the kind of interpretation which is accompanied by under- 
standing and discourse. Because temporality is ecstattco-horizonally constitutive 
Sor the clearedness of the “there, temporality ts always primordtally interpretable 
in the ‘‘there’’ and is accordingly familiar to us. The making-present which 
interprets itself—in other words, that which has been interpreted and is 
addressed in the ‘now’—is what we call ‘time’. This simply makes known 
to us that temporality—which, as ecstatically open, is recognizable—is 
familiar, proximally and for the most part, only as interpreted in this 
concernful manner.! But while time is ‘immediately’ intelligible and 
recognizable, this does not preclude the possibility that primordial 
temporality as such may remain unknown and unconceived, and that this 
is also the case with the source of the time which has been expressed—a 
source which temporalizes itself in that temporality. 

The fact that the structure of datability belongs essentially to what has _ 
been interpreted with the ‘now’, the ‘then’, and the ‘on that former 
occasion’, becomes the most elemental proof that what has thus been 
interpreted has originated in the temporality which interprets itself. 
When we say ‘now’, we always understand a ‘now: that so and 


1 ‘Das sich auslegende Gegenwärtigen, das heisst das im ‘‘jetzt’? angesprochene Aus 
gelegte nennen wir “Zeit”. Darin bekundet sich lediglich, dass die Zeitlichkeit, als 
ekstatisch offene kenntlich, zunächst und zumeist nur in dieser besorgenden Ausgelegtheit 
bekannt ist.’ The older editions have ‘ausgesprochene’ (‘expressed’) rather than ‘ anges- 
prochene’ (‘addressed’ ); the comma after ‘Zeitlichkeit’ is missing, and the particle ‘ja’ 
appears just before ‘zunächst’, 


11. 6 Being and Time 461 


so...’ though we do not say all this. Why ? Because the “now” interprets a 
making-present of entities. In the ‘now that...’ lies the ecstatical character 
of the Present. The datability of the ‘now’, the ‘then’, and the ‘on that 
former occasion’, reflects the ecstatical constitution of temporality, and is 
therefore essential for the time itself that has been expressed. The structure 
of the datability of the ‘now’, the ‘then’, and the ‘on that former occasion’ 
is evidence that these, stemming from temporality, are themselves time. The 
interpretative expressing of the ‘now’, the ‘then’, and the ‘on that former 
occasion’, is the most primordial way of assigning a time.* In the ecstatical 
unity of temporality—which gets understood along with datability, but 
unthematically and without being recognizable as such—Dasein has 
already been disclosed to itself as Being-in-the-world, and entities within- 
the-world have been discovered along with it; because of this, interpreted 
time has already been given a dating in terms of those entities which are 
encountered in the disclosedness of the “there”: “now that—the door 
slams” ; “now that—my book is missing”, and so forth.® | 

The horizons which belong to the ‘now’, the ‘then’, and the ‘on that 
former occasion’, all have their source of ecstatical temporality; by reason 
of this, these horizons too have the character of datability as ‘today, 
when ...’, ‘later on, when. ..’, and ‘earlier, when... .’* 

If awaiting understands itself in the ‘then’ and interprets itself, and 
thereby, as making present, understands that which it awaits, and under- 
stands this in terms of its ‘now’, then the ‘and-now-not-yet’ is already 
implied when we ‘assign’ a ‘then’. The awaiting which makes present 
understands the ‘until-then’. This ‘until-then’ is Articulated by inter- 
pretation: it ‘has its time’ as the “in-between”, which likewise has a relation- 
ship of datability. This relationship gets expressed in the ‘during-this’ or 
‘meanwhile’ [““während dessen . . .”’|. The ‘during’ can itself be Articulated 
awaitingly by concern, by assigning some more ‘thens’. The ‘until- 
then’ gets divided up by a number of ‘from-then-till-thens’, which, how- 
ever, have been ‘embraced’ beforehand in awaitingly projecting the 
primary ‘then’. ‘Enduring’ gets Articulated in the understanding one has 


1‘ “Tetzt”’-sagend verstehen wir immer auch schon, ohne es mitzusagen, ein ‘‘—da 
das und das...’ 

2‘... dass diese vom Stamme der Zeitlichkeit, selbst Zeit sind. Das auslegende Aussprechen 
der “‘jetzt’”’, “dann” und “damals” ist die ursprünglichste Zeitangabe.’ The earlier editions 
have ‘sie’ instead of ‘diese’. (While we have generally tried to reserve the verb ‘assign’ for 
verbs such as ‘verweisen’ and ‘zuweisen’, it is convenient to use it in this chapter to 
translate such expressions as ‘angeben’, ‘Angabe’, and ‘Zeitangabe’.) 

3°... jetzt, da—die Tür schlägt; jetzt, da—mir das Buch fehlt, und dergleichen.’ While 
the phrase ‘jetzt’ da... .’ ordinarily means ‘now that . . .’, Heidegger here seems to be 
interpreting it with an illusion to the ‘da’ which we have usually translated as ‘there’— 
the ‘da’ of ‘Dasein’. 

4‘ “Heute, wo...”, “Spaterhin, wann...” und “Früher, da...” 


409 


410 


462 Being and Time 11. 6 


of the ‘during’ when one awaits and makes present.! This lasting[ Dauern], 
in turn, is the time which is manifest in temporality’s interpretation of 
itself; in our concern this time thus gets currently, but unthematically, 
understood as a ‘span’ [““Spanne’’]. The making-present which awaits 
and retains, lays ‘out’ a ‘during’ with a span, only because it has thereby 
disclosed itself as the way in which its historical temporality has been 
ecstatically stretched along, even though it does not know itself as this.” But 
here a further peculiarity of the time which has been ‘assigned’ shows 
itself. Not only does the ‘during’ have a span; but every ‘now’, ‘then’, and 
‘on that former occasion’ has, with its datability-structure, its own 
spanned character, with the width of the span varying: ‘now’—in the 
intermission, while one is eating, in the evening, in summer; ‘then’—at 
breakfast, when one is taking a climb, and so forth. 

. The concern which awaits, retains, and makes present, is one which 
‘allows itself” so much time; and it assigns itself this time concernfully, even 
without determining the time by any specific reckoning, and before any 
such reckoning has been done. Here time dates itself in one’s current mode 
of allowing oneself time concernfully; and it does so in terms of those very 
matters with which one concerns oneself environmentally, and which have 
been disclosed in the understanding with its accompanying state-of-mind 
—in terms of what one does ‘all day long’. The more Dasein is awaitingly 
absorbed in the object of its concern and forgets itself in not awaiting 
itself, the more docs even the time which it ‘allows’ itself remain covered up 
by this way of ‘allowing’. When Dasein is ‘living along’ in an everyday 
concernful manner, it just never understands itself as running along in a 
Continuously enduring sequence of pure ‘nows’. By reason of this covering 
up, the time which Dasein allows itself has gaps in it, as it were. Often 
we do not bring a ‘day’ together again when we come back to the time 
which we have ‘used’. But the time which has gaps in it does not go to 
pieces in this lack-of-togetherness, which is rather a mode of that 
temporality which has already been disclosed and stretched along ecstatically. 
The manner in which the time we have ‘allowed’ ‘runs its course’, and the 
way in which concern more or less explicitly assigns itself that time, can 
be properly explained as phenomena only if, on the one hand, we avoid 


1 ‘Mit dem gewärtigend-gegenwärtigenden Verstehen des “während” wird das 
“Währen” artikuliert.’ “Wahren’ of course means ‘enduring’ in the sense of lasting or 
continuing, not in that of ‘suffering’ or ‘tolerating’. 

2 ‘Das gewärtigend-behaltende Gegenwärtigen legt nur deshalb ein gespanntes 

“während” “aus”, weil. es dabei sich als die ekstatische Erstrecktheit der geschichtlichen 
Zeitlichkeit, wenngleich als solche unerkannt, erschlossen ist.’ Our translation of ‘ges- 


pannites' as ‘with a span’ preserves the connection with ‘Spanne’ but misses the connotation 


of ‘tenseness’, which Heidegger clearly has in mind elsewhere (e.g. H. 261 f., 374) and is 
surely suggesting here. The pun on ‘auslegen’ (‘interpret’) and ‘legt . . . “aus”? (‘lays 
out” ') also disappears in translation. 


IT. 6 Being and Time 463 
the theoretical ‘representation’ of a Continuous stream of “‘nows’’, and if, 
on the other hand, the possible ways in which Dasein assigns itself time 
and allows itself time are to be conceived of as determined primarily in 
terms of how Dasein, in a manner corresponding to tts current existence, ‘has’ tts time. 

In an earlier passage authentic and inauthentic existing nave been 
characterized with regard to those modes of the temporalizing of tempor- 
ality upon which such existing is founded. According to that characteriza- 
tion, the irtesoluteness of inauthentic existence temporalizes itself in the 
mode of a making-present which does not await but forgets. He who is 
irresolute understands himself in terms of those very closest events and 
be-fallings which he encounters in such a making-present and which 
thrust themselves upon him in varying ways. Busily losing himself in the 
object of his concern, he loses his time in it too. Hence his characteristic way 
of talking— I have no time’. But just as he who exists inauthentically is 
constantly losing time and never ‘has’ any, the temporality of authentic 
existence remains distinctive in that such existence, in its resoluteness, 
never loses time and ‘always has time’. For the temporality of resoluteness 
has, with relation to its Present; the character of a moment of vision. When 
such a moment makes the Situation authentically present, this making- 
present does not itself take the lead, but is Aeld in that future which is in 
the process of having-been: One’s existence in the moment of vision tem- 
poralizes itself as something that has been stretched along in a way which 
is fatefully whole in the sense. of the authentic historical constancy of the Self. 
This kind of temporal existence has its time for what the Situation demands 
of it, and it has it ‘constantly’. ‚But resoluteness discloses the “there” in 
this way only as.a Situation.,So if he who is resolute encounters anything 
that has been disclosed, he can never do so in such a way as to lose his 
time on it irresolutely. 

The ‘‘there’’ ts disclosed in a way which is grounded tn Dasein’s own temporality 
as ecstatically stretched along, and with this disclosure a ‘time’ is allotted to Dasein ; 
only because of this can Dasein, as factically thrown, ‘take’ its time and lose it. 

As something disclosed, Dasein exists factically in the way of Being with 
Others. It maintains itself in an intelligibility which is public and average. 
When the ‘now that... .’ and the ‘then when...’ have been interpreted 
and expressed in our everyday Being with one another, they will be under- 
stood in principle, even though their dating is unequivocal only within 
certain limits. In the ‘most intimate’ Being-with-one-another of several 
people, they can say ‘now’ and say it ‘together’, though each of them gives 
a different date to the ‘now’ which he is saying: “‘now that this or that 
has come to pass . . .”” The ‘now’ which anyone expresses is always said 
in the publicness of Being-in-the-world with one another. Thus the time 


411 


464 Being and Time Il. 6 


which any Dasein has currently interpreted and expressed has as such 
already been given a public character on the basis of that Dasein’s ecstatical 
Being-in-the-world. In so far, then, as everyday concern understands 
itself in terms of the ‘world’ of its concern and takes its ‘time’, it does not 
know this ‘time’ as its own, but concernfully utilizes the time which ‘there 
is’ [es gibt’’]—the time with which “they” reckon. Indeed the publicness 
of ‘time’ -ig all the more compelling, the more explicitly factical Dasein 
concerns itsélf with time in specifically taking it into its reckoning. 


€| 80. The Time with which we Concern Ourselves, and Within-time-ness 


So far we have only had to understand provisionally how Dasein, as 
grounded in temporality, is, in its very existing, concerned with times 
and how, in such interpretative concern, time makes itself public for 
Being-in-the-world. But the sense in which time ‘is’ if it is of the kind 
which is public and has been expressed, remains completely undefined, 
if indeed such time can be considered as being at all. Before we can make 
any decision as to whether public time is ‘merely subjective’ or ‘Objec- 
tively actual’, or neither of these, its phenomenal character must first 
be determined more precisely. 

When time is made public, this does not happen just occasionally and 
subsequently. On the contrary, because Dasein, as something ecstatico- 
temporal, is already disclosed, and because understanding and interpreta- 
tion both belong to existence, time has already made itself public in 
concern. One directs oneself according to it, so that it must somehow be the 
sort of thing which Everyman can come across. 

Although one can concern oneself with time in the manner which we 
have characterized—namely, by dating in terms of environmental events 
—this always happens basically within the horizon of that kind of concern 
with time which we know as astronomical and calendrical time-reckoning. 
Such reckoning does not occur by accident, but has its existential-onto- 
logical necessity in the basic state of Dasein as care. Because it is essential 
to Dasein that it exists fallingly as something thrown, it interprets its 
time concernfully by way of time-reckoning. Jn this, the ‘real’ making- 

412 public of time gets temporalized, so that we must say that Dasein’s thrownness 
is the reason why ‘there is’ time publicly.) If we are to demonstrate that public 
time has its source in factical temporality, and if we are to assure ourselves 
that this demonstration is as intelligible as possible, the time which has 
been interpreted in the temporality of concern must first be characterized, 


1 ‘in ihr zeitigt sich die “eigentliche” Veröffentlichung der Zeit, sodass gesagt werden 
muss: die Geworfenheit des Daseins ist der Grund dafür, dass es öffentlich Zeit ““gibt”’.’ Heidegger's 
quotation marks around ‘gibt’ suggest an intentional pun which would permit the alter- 
native translation: ‘. . . the reason why Dasein “gives” time publicly.’ 


II. 6 Being and Time 455 


if only in order to make clear that the essence of concern with time does 
not lie in the application of numerical procedures in dating. Thus in time- 
reckoning, what is decisive from an existential-ontological standpoint is not 
to be seen in the quantification of time but must be conceived more prim- 


ordially in terms of the temporality of the Dasein which reckons with time. 


‘Public time’ turns out to be the kind of time ‘in which’ the ready-to- 
hand and the present-at-hand within-the-world are encountered. This 
requires that these entities which are not of the character of Dasein, shall 
be called entities “‘within-time’. The Interpretation of within-time-ness 
gives us a more primordial insight into the essence of ‘public time’ and 
likewise makes it possible to define its ‘Being’. 

The Being of Dasein is care. This entity exists fallingly as something 
that has been thrown. Abandoned to the ‘world’ which is discovered with 
its factical “there”, and concernfully submitted to it, Dasein awaits its 
potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world ; it awaits it in such a manner that 
it ‘reckons’ on and ‘reckons’ with whatever has an involvement for the sake 
of this potentiality-for-Being—-an involvement which, in the end, is a 
distinctive one.! Everyday circumspective Being-in-the-world needs the 
possibility of sight (and this means that it needs brightness) if it is to deal 
concernfully with what is ready-to-hand within the present-at-hand. With 
the factical disclosedness of Dasein’s world, Nature has been uncovered 
for Dasein. In its thrownness Dasein has been surrendered to the changes 
of day and night. Day with its brightness gives it the possibility of sight; 
night takes this away. 

Dasein awaits with circumspective concern the possibility of sight, and 
it understands itself in terms of its daily work; in thus awaiting and under- 
standing, it gives its time with the ‘then, when it dawns .. .’* The ‘then’ 
with which Dasein concerns itself gets dated in terms of something which 
is connected with getting bright, and which is connected with it in the 
closest kind of environmental involvement—namely, the rising of the sun. 
“Then, when the sun rises, it is time for so and so.” Thus Dasein dates 
the time which it must take, and dates it in terms of something it encounters 
within the world and within the horizon of its abandonment to the world 
—in terms of something encountered as having a distinctive involve- 
ment for its circumspective potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world. Concern 
makes use of the ‘Being-ready-to-hand’ of the sun, which sheds forth light 
and warmth. The sun dates the time which is interpreted in concern. 
In terms of this dating arises the ‘most naural’ measure of time—the day. 


1‘ .. dass es mit dem und auf das “rechnet”, womit es umwillen dieses Seinkönnens 
eine am Ende ausgezeichnete Bewandinis hat.’ 


2‘,.. mit dem “dann, wann es tagt”... .’ 


415 


414 


456 Being and Time 1.6 


And because the temporality of that Dasein which must take its time is. 
finite, its days are already numbered. Concernful awaiting takes precaw 
tion to_define”the ‘thens’ with which it is to concern itself—that is, tò 
divide up the Jay. And the ‘during-the-daytime’ makes this possible. 
This dividin.:--up, in tarn, is done with regard to that >y which time is 
dated—the journeying sun. Sunset and midday, like the sunrise itself, 
‚are distinctive ‘pieces’ which this heavenly body occupies. Its regularly | 
recurring passage is .vcething which Dasein, as thrown into the world | 
and giving seif time ‘emporalizingly, takes into its reckoning. Dasein 
historizes frs:n day io day vy reason of its way of interpreting time by dating | 
it—a way which is adum:brated in its thrownness into the “there”. 

This dat: of things in terms of the heavenly body which sheds forth 
light and w2:mth, and in terms of its distinctive ‘places’ in the sky, sa 
way of assigning time which can be done in our Being with one another. 
‘under the same sky’, and which can be done for ‘Everyman’ at any time 
in the same way, so that within certain limits everyone is proximally agreed 
upon it. That by which things are thus dated is available environmentally 
ahd yet not restricted to the world of equipment with which one currently 
concerns oneself, It is rather the case that in the world the environing. 
Nature and the public environment are always discovered along with itt 
This public dating, i in which everyone assigns himself his time, is one which 
everyone can “reckon’ on simultaneously; it uses a publicly. available 
measure. This dating reckons with time.in the sense of a measuring of tii 
and such measuring requires: ‚something by which time is to.be Hieasured: 
—namely, a clock. This implies that along with the temporality of Dasein a. 
thrown, abandoned to the ‘world’, "and giving itself time, something like a “clock” 
is also discovered—that is, something ready-to-hand which in its regular recurrence. 
has become accessible in one’s making present awaitingly. The Being which has. 
been thrown and isalongside the ready-to-hand is grounded in temporality. 
Temporality is the reason for the clock. As the condition for the: pos 
sibility that a clock is factically necessary, temporality is likewise he 
condition for its discoverability. For while the course of the sun is encoun- 
tered along with the discoveredness of entities within-the-world, it Is only 
by making it present in awaitingly retaining, and by doing so in a Way 
which interprets itself, that. dating in terms of what is ready-to-hand 
environmentally in a public way is made possible and is also required. 

Dasein has its basis in temporality, and the ‘natural’ clock which has 
already been discovered along with: Dasein’s factical thrownness furnishes 
the first motivation for the prodiiction and use of clocks which will be 
somewhat more handy; it also makes this possible. Indeed it does this in 
such a manner that these ‘artificial’ clocks must be ‘adjusted’ to that 


JI. 6 Being and Time 467 
‘natural’ one if the time which is primarily discoverable in the natural 
clock is to be made accessible in its turn. 

Before describing the chief features in the development of time-reckon- 
ing and the use of clecks in their existential-ontoicgical meaning, we must 
first characterize more completely the time with which we are concerned 
when we measure it. If the time with which we concern ourselves is ‘really’ 
made public only when it gets measured, then if public time is to be acces- 
sible in a way which has been phenomenally unveiled, we must have access 
to it by following up the way in which that which has been dated shows 
itself when dated in this ‘reckoning’ manner. 

When the ‘then’ which interprets itself in concernful awaiting gets dated, 
this dating includes some such statement as “then—when it dawns—it is 
hme for one’s daily work”. The time which is interpreted in concern is 
already understood as a time for something. The current ‘now that so 
and so...’ is as such either appropriate or inappropriate. Not only is the ‘now’ 
(and so too any mode of interpreted time) a ‘now that .. .’ which is 
essentially datable; but as such it has essentially, at the same time, the 
structure of appropriateness or inappropriateness. Time which has been 
interpreted has by its very nature the character of ‘the time for something’ 
or ‘the wrong time for something’.! When concern makes present by 
awaiting and retaining, time is understood in relation to a “for-which” ;? 
and this in turn is ultimately tied up with a “‘for-the-sake-of-which”’ of 
Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being. With this “in-order-to” relation, the time 


‚which has been made public makes manifest that structure with which 


- 


we have earlierii! become acquainted as significance, and which constitutes 
the worldhood of the world. As ‘the time for something’, the time which has 
been made public has essentially a world-character. Hence the time which 
makes itself public in the temporalizing of temporality is what we desig- 
nate as ““world-time”. And we designate it thus not because it is present- 
at-hand as an entity within-the-world (which it can never be), but because it 
belongs to the world [zur Welt] in the sense which we have Interpreted 
existential-ontologically. In the following pages we must show how the 
essential relations of the world-structure (the ‘in-order-to’, for example) are 
connected with public time (the ‘then, when. . .’, or example) by reason 
of the ecstatico-horizonal constitution. of temporality. Only now, in any 
case, can the time with which we concern ourselves be completely char- 
acterized as to its structure: it 1s datable, spanned, and public; and as 
having this structure, it belongs to the world itself. Every ‘now’, for 


1°, ,. den Charakter der “Zeit zu... .” bzw.ider “Unzeit für . . .’ 

8¢ ein Wozu...’ Here English idiom calls for the expression ‘for-which’ rather than 
‘towards-which’, though the latter expression has served us fairly well in similar aren 
such as those cited in Heidegger’s note iii below. {See also our note 1, p. 109, H. 78 above. 


e 


415 


416 


468 Being and Time II. 6 


instance, which is expressed in a natural everyday manner, has this kind 
of structure, and is understood as such, though pre-conceptually and 
unthematically, when Dasein concernfully allows itself time. 

The disclosedness of the natural clock belongs to the Dasein which 
exists as thrown and falling; and in this disclosedness factical Dasein has 
at the same time already given a distinctive public character to the time 
with which it concerns itself. As time-reckoning is perfected and the use 
of clocks becomes more refined, this making-public gets enhanced and 
strengthened. We shall not give here a historiological presentation of the 
historical evolution of time-reckoning and the use of clocks, with all its 
possible variations. We must rather ask in an existential-ontological way 
what mode of the temporalizing of Dasein’s temporality becomes manifest 
in the direction which the development of time-reckoning and clock-using 
has taken. When this question is answered, there must arise a more prim- 
ordial understanding of the fact that the measurement of time—and this 
means also the explicit making-public of time as an object of concern—is 
grounded in the temporality of Dasein, and indeed in a quite definite tem- 
poralizing of that temporality. 

Comparison shows that for the ‘advanced’ Dasein the day and the 
presence of sunlight no longer have such a special function as they have 
for the ‘primitive’ Dasein on which our analysis of ‘natural’ time-reckon- 
ing has been based; for the ‘advanced’ Dasein has the ‘advantage’ of 
even being able to turn night into day. Similarly we no longer need to 
glance explicitly and immediately at the sun and its position to ascertain 
the time. The manufacture and use of measuring-equipment of one’s 
own permits one to read off the time directly by a clock produced espec- 
ially for this purpose. The “what o’clock is it?” is the ‘what time is it?’ 
Because the clock—in the sense of that which makes possible a public way 
of time-reckoning—must be regulated by the ‘natural’ clock, even the 
use of clocks as equipment is based upon Dasein’s temporality, which, 
with the disclosedness of the “there”, first makes possible a dating of the 
time with which we concern ourselves; this is a fact, even if it is covered 
up when the time is read off. Our understanding of the natural clock 
develops with the advancing discovery of Nature, and instructs us as to new 
possibilities for a kind of time-measurement which is relatively independent 
of the day and of any explicit observation of the sky. 

But in a certain manner even ‘primitive’ Dasein makes itself in- 
dependent of reading off the time directly from the sky, when instead of 
ascertaining the sun’s position it measures thc shadow cast by some entity 
available at any time. This can happen in the first instance in the simplest 
form of the ancient ‘peasant’s clock’. Everyman is constantly accompanied 


iI. 6 Being and Time 469 


by a shadow; and in the shadow the sun is encountered with respect to its 
changing presence at different places. In the daytime, shadows have 
different lengths which can be paced off ‘at any time’. Even if individuals 
differ in the lengths of their bodies and feet, the relationship between them 
remains constant within certain limits of accuracy. Thus,’ for example, 
when one is concerned with making an appointment, one designates the 
time publicly by saying, ‘When the shadow is so many feet long, then 
we shall meet yonder.’ Here in Being with one another within the rather 
narrow boundaries of an environment which is very close to us, it is 
tacitly presupposed that the ‘locations’ at which the shadow gets paced 
off are at the same latitude. This clock is one which Dasein does 
not have to carry around with it; in a certain manner Dasein itself is 
the clock. 

The public sundial, in which the line of a shadow is counterposed to 
the course of the sun and moves along a numbered track, needs no further 
description. But why is it that at the position which the shadow occupies 
on the dial we always find something like time? Neither the shadow nor 
the divided track is time itself, nor is the spatial relationship between 
them. Where, then, is the time, which we thus read off directly not only 
on the ‘sundial’ but also on any pocket watch ? 

What does “‘reading off the time” signify? ‘Looking at the clock’ does 
indeed amount to more than observing the changes in some item of 
equipment which is ready-to-hand, and following the positions of a 
pointer. When we use a clock in ascertaining what o’clock it is, we say—— 
whether explicitly or not—“*‘It is now such and such an hour and so many 
minutes; now is the time for . . .” or “there is still time enough new 
until . . .”. Looking at the clock is based on taking our time, and is 
guided by it. What has already shown itself in the most elementary time- 
reckoning here becomes plainer: when we look at the clock and regulate 
ourselves according to the time, we are essentially saying ‘‘now’’. Here the 
“now” has in each case already been understood and interpreted in its full 
structural content of datability, spannedness, publicness, and worldhood. 
This is so ‘obvious’ that we take no note of it whatsoever; still less do we 
know anything about it explicitly. 

Saying “now”, however, is the discursive Articulation of a making- 
present which temporalizes itself in a unity with a retentive awaiting. The 
dating which is performed when one uses a clock, turns out to be a dis- 
tinctive way in which something present-at-hand i: made present. Datir: ; 
does not simply relate to something present-at- and; this kind of relatin~ 
has itself the character of measuring. Of course tue number which we get i. 
measuring can be read off immediately. But this implies that when z 


417 


470 Being and Time IT. 6. 


stretch is to be measüred, we understand that our standard is, in a way, 
contained in it; that is, we determine the frequency of its presence in that ' 
stretch. Measuring is constituted temporally when a standard which has 
presence is made present in a stretch which has presence. The idea 
of a standard implies unchangingness; this means that for everyone 
at any time the standard, in its stability, must be present-at-hand. 
When the time with which one concerns oneself is dated by measuring, 
one interprets it by looking at something present-at-hand and making it 
present—something which would not become accessible as a standard or 
as something measured except by our making it present in this distinctive 
manner. Because the making-present of something having presence has 
a special priority in dating by measuring, the measurement in which one 
reads off the time by the clock also expresses itself with special emphasis in 
the “now”. Thus when time is measured, it is made public in such a way that 
it is encountered on each occasion and at any time for everyone as ‘now 
and now and now’. This time which is ‘universally’ accessible in clocks is 
something that we come across as a present-at-hand multiplicity ef “nows”, 
so to speak, though the measuring of time is not directed thematically 
towards time as such. 

The temporality of factical Being-in-the-world is what primordially 
makes the disclosure of space possible; and in each case spatial Dasein 
has—out of a “yonder”? which has been discovcred—allctted itself a 
“here” which isof the character of Dasein. Because of aii this the time with 
which Daseir: concerns itself in its temporality is, as rezards its datability, 
always bourd up with some location of that Dasein. Time itself does not 
get linked to a location; but temporality is the condition fer the possibility 
that dating may be bound up with the spaiially-local in such 2 way that this 
may be binding for everyone as a measure. Time does not first get coupled 
with space; but the ‘space’ which one might suppose to be coupled with 
it, is encountered only on the basis of the temporality which concerns itself 
with time. Inasmuch as both time-reckening and the clock are founded 
upon the temporality of Dasein, which is constitutive for this entity as 
historical, it ınay be shown to what extent, ontologically, the use of clocks 
is itself historical, and to what extent every clock as such ‘has a history’,iv 

Tue time which is made public by our measuring it, does not by any 
means turn into space because we date it in terms of spatial measurement- 
relations. Still less is what is exisiential-ontologically essential in the 

sasuring of time to be sought in the fact that dated ‘time’ is determined 
numerically in terms of spadial stretches and in changes in the location of 
some spatial Thing. Waat 1s ontologically decisive lies rather in the 
specific kind of making-present which makes measurement possible, Dating 


II. 6 Being and Time 471 


in terms of what is ‘spatially’ present-at-hand is so far from a spatializing 
of time that this supposed spatialization signifies nothing else than that an 
entity which is present-at-hand for everyone in every “now” is made 
present in its own presence. Measuring time is essentially such that it is 
necessary to say “now”; but in obtaining the measurement, we, as it 
were, forget what has been measured as such, so that nothing is to be 
found except a number and a stretch. 

When Dasein concerns itself with time, then the less time it has tc lose, 
the more ‘precious’ does that time become, and the kandier the clock must 
be. Not only should we be able to assign the time ‘more precisely’, but the 
very determining of the time should claim as little time as possible, though 
it must still agree with the ways in which Others assign time. 

Provisionally it was enough for us to point out the general ‘connection’ 
of the use of clocks with that temporality which takes its time. Just as the 
concrete analysis of astronomical time-reckoning in its full development 
belongs to the existential-ontological Interpretation of how Nature is 
discovered, the foundations of historiological and calendrical ‘chronology’ 
can be laid bare only within the orbit of the tasks of analysing historio- 
logical cognition existentially.Y 

The measurement of time gives it a marked pubiic character, so that 
only in this way does what we generally call ‘the time’ become well known. 
in concern every Thing has ‘its time’ attributed to it. It ‘has’ it, and, like 
every entity within-the-world, it can ‘have’ it only because after all it is 
‘in time’. Fhat time ‘wherein’ entities within-the-world are encountered, 
we know as “world-tiine”. By reason of the ecstatico-horizonal cor:- 
stitution of the temporality which belongs to it, this has the same 
transcendence as the world itself. With the disclosedness of the world, 
world-time has been made public, so that every temporally concernful Being 
alongside entities within-ihe-world understands these entities circumspec- 
tively as encountered ‘in time’. 

The time ‘in which’ the present-at-hand is in motion or at rest ts 
not ‘Objective’, if what we mean by that is the Being-present-at-hand-in- 
itself of entities encountered within-the-world. But just as little is time 
‘subjective’, if by this we understand Being-present-at-hand and occur- 
ring in a ‘subject’. World-time is ‘more Odjectwe’ than any possible Object 
because, with the disclosedness of the world, it already becomes ‘Objectified’ in an 
ecstatico-horizonal manner as the condition for the possibility of entities within-ihe- 
world. Thus, contrary to Kant’s opinion, one comes across world-tir2 
just as immediately in the physical as in the psychical, and not just 
roundabout by way of the psychical. ‘Time’ first shows itself in the 
sky—precisely where one comes across it when one regulates onescif 


420 


472 Being and Time II. 6 


naturally according to it—so that ‘time’ even becomes identified with the sky. 
|World-time, moreover, is also ‘more subjective’ than any possible subject; for it is 
what first makes possible the Being of the factically existing Self—that Being which, 
as is now well understood, is the meaning of care. “Time’ is present-at-hand 
neither in the ‘subject’ nor in the ‘Object’, neither ‘inside’ nor ‘outside’; 
and it ‘is’ ‘earlier’ than any subjectivity or Objectivity, ‘because it presents 
the condition for the very possibility of this ‘earlier’. Has it then any 
‘Being’? And if not, is it then a mere phantom, or is it something that has 
‘more Being’ [“‘seiender”] than any possible entity? Any investigation 
which goes further in the direction of questions such as these, will come 
up against the same ‘boundary’ which has already set itself up to our 
provisional discussion of the connection between truth and Being.¥! In 
whatever way these questions may be answered in what follows—or in 
whatever way they may first of all get primordially formulated—we must 
first understand that temporality, as ecstatico-horizonal, temporalizes 
something like world-time, which constitutes a within-time-ness of the 
ready-to-hand and the present-at-hand. But in that case such entities 
can never be designated as ‘temporal’ in the strict sense. Like every entity 
with a character other than that of Dasein, they are non-temporal, 
whether they Really occur, arise and pass away, or subsist ‘ideally’. 

If world-time thus belongs to the temporalizing of temporality, then it can 
neither be volatilized ‘subjectivistically’ nor ‘reifted’ by a vicious “Objecti- 
fication’. These two possibilities can be avoided with a clear insight—not 
just by wavering insecurely between them—only if we can understand how 
everyday Dasein conceives of ‘time’ theoretically in terms of an under- 
standing of time in the way which is closest to it, and if we can also 
understand to what extent this conception of time and the prevalence of this 
concept obstruct the possibility of our understanding in terms of primor- 
dial time what is meant by this conception—that is, the possibility of 
understanding it as temporality. The everyday concern which gives itself 
time, finds ‘the time’ in those entities within-the-world which are encoun- 
tered ‘in time’. So if we are to cast any light on the genesis of the ordinary 
conception of time, we must take within-time-ness as our point of departure. 


T 8r. Within-time-ness and the Genesis of the Ordinary Conception of Time 


How does something like ‘time’ first show itself for everyday circum- 
spective concern? In what kind of concernful equipment-using dealings 
does it become explicitly accessible? If it has been made public with the 
disclosedness of the world, if it has always been already a matter of 
concern with the discoveredness of entities within-the-world—a dis- 
coveredness which belongs to the world’s disclosedness—and if it has been 


II. 6 Being and Time 473 


a matter of such concern in so far as Dasein calculates time in reckoning 
with itself, then the kind of behaviour in which ‘one’ explicitly regulates 
oneself according to time, lies in the use of clocks. The existential-temporal 
meaning of this turns out to be a making-present of the travelling pointer. 
By following the positions of the pointer in a way which makes present, 
one counts them. This making-present temporalizes itself in the ecstatical 
unity of a retention which awaits. To retain the ‘on that former occasion’ 
and to retain it by making it present, signifies that in saying “now” one 
is open for the horizon of the earlier—that is, of the “now-no-longer”. To 
await the ‘then’ by making it present, means that in saying ‘“‘now” one is 
open for the horizon of the later—that is, of the “now-not-yet”. Time is 
what shows itself in such a making-present. How then, are we to define the 
time which is manifest within the horizon of the circumspective concernful 
clock-using in which one takes one’s time? This time ts that which ts 
counted and which shows itself when one follows the travelling pointer, counting 
and making present in such a way that this making-present temporalizes itself in an 
ecstatical unity with the retaining and awaiting which are horizonally open according 
to the ““sarlier” and “‘later’’, This, however, is nothing else than an existential- 
ontological interpretation of Aristotle’s definition of “time”: roro ydp 
dory ô xpdvos, äpıduos xwicews xarà TO Tpötepov Kal vorepov. 
“For this is time: that which is counted in the movement which we 
encounter within the horizan of the earlier and later.”’vi! This definition 
may seem strange at first glance; but if one defines the existential- 
ontological horizon from which Aristotle has taken it, one sees that it is as 
‘obvious’ as it at first seems strange, and has been genuinely derived. The 
source of the time which is thus manifest does not become a problem for 
Aristotle. His Interpretation of time moves rather in the direction of the 
‘natural’ way of understanding Being. Yet because this very understand- 
ing and the Being which is thus understood have in principle been made 
a problem for the investigation which lies before us, it is only after we have 
found a solution for the question of Being that the Aristotelian analysis of 
time can be Interpreted thematically in such a way that it may indeed 
gain some signification in principle, if the formulation of this question in 
ancient ontology, with all its critical limitations, is to be appropriated in 
a positive manner. Vill 

Ever since Aristotle all discussions of the concept of time have clung 
in principle to the Aristotelian definitions; that is, in taking time as their 
theme, they have taken it as it shows itself in circumspective concern. 
Time is what is ‘counted’; that is to say, it is what is expressed and what 
we have in view, even if unthematically, when the travelling pointer (or 
the shadow) is made present. When one makes present that which is 


421 


474 Being and Time II. 6 
moved in its movement, one says ‘now here, now here, and so on’. The 
‘“‘nows”’ are what get counted. And these show themselves ‘in every “‘now’” 
as ‘‘nows” which will ‘forthwith be no-longer-now’ and ‘‘nows” which 
have ‘just becn not-yet-now’.} The world-time which is ‘sighted’ in this 
manner in the use of ciocks, we call the “‘now-time’’ [ Fetzt-Zeit]. 

When the concern which gives itself time reckons with time, the 
more ‘naturally’ it does so, the less it dwells at the expressed time as such; 
on the contrary, it is lost in the equipment with which it concerns itself, 
which in each case has a time of its own. When concern determines the 
time and assigr:s it, the more ‘naturally’ it does so—that is, the less it is 
directed towards treating time as such thematically—all the more does 
the Being which is alongside the object of concern (the Being which falls 
as it makes present) say unhesitatingly (whether or not anything 1s 
uttered) “now” or “then” or “on that former occasion”. Thus for the 
ordinary understanding of time, time shows itself as a sequence of “‘'nows” 
which are constantly ‘present-at-hand’, simultaneously passing away 
and coming along. Time is understood as a succession, as a “flowing 
stream’ of “nows”, as the ‘course of time’. What is implied by suck an 
interpretation of the world-time with which we concern ourselves ? 

We get the answer if we go back to the full essential structu:e of werid- 
time and compare this with that with which the ordinary understanding 
of time is acquainted. We have exhibited datebility as the first essential 
item in the tame with which we concein ourselves. This is grounded 
in the oe “open of temporality. The ‘now’ is essentially 
a “now that...”. The datable “now”, which is understood in concern 
even if we cammot grasp it as guch, is in each case one which is either 
appropriate r inappropriate. Significance belongs to the structure of the 
“now”. We T accordingly called the time with which we concem 
Sirsclve es '“world-time”. In the ordinary interpretations of time as a 
sequence of “nows”, both datability and significance are missing. These 
two structures are not permitted to ‘come to the fore’ when time is char- 
acterized as a pure succession. The ordinary interpretation of time covers 
them up. When these are covered up, the ecstatico-horizonal constitution 
of temporality, in which the datability and the significance of the ‘‘now” 
are grounded, gets levelled off, The ‘“‘nows’’ get shorn of these relations, as 
it were; and, as thus shorn, they simply range themselves along after one 
another so as to make up the succession. 

It is no accident that world-time thus gets levelled off and covered up! 


by the way time is ordinarily understood. But just because the everyday; 


1 ‘Und diese ‚sich “in jedem Jetzt” als “sogleich-nicht-mehr . . .” und eben- 
Pe, ’ It is possible to read the hyphenated expressions in other ways. 


i 


2 


il. 6 Being and Time 475 


interpretation of time maintains itself by looking solely in the direction of 
concernful common sense, and understands only what ‘shows’ itself within 
the common-sense horizon, these structures must escape it. That which gets 
counted when one measures time concernfully, the ‘‘now’’, gets co-under- 
stood in one’s concern with the present-at-hand and the ready-to-hand. 
Now so far as this concern with time comes back to the time itself which 
Ben been co-understood, and in so far as it ‘considers’ that time, it sees the 

“nows” (which indeed are also somehow ‘there’) within the horizon of that 
understanding-of-Being by which this concern is itself constantly guided.!* 
Thus the ‘‘nows”’ are in a certain manner co-present-at-hand: that is, entities 
are encountered, and so top is the “now”. Although it is not said explicitly 
that the ‘‘nows’” are present-at-hand in the same way as Things, they still 
get ‘seen’ ontologically within the horizon of the idea of presence-at-hand, 
The ‘‘nows”’ pass away, and those which have passed away make up the 
past. The “‘nows” come alang, and those which are coming along define the 
‘future’, The ordinary interpretation of world-time as now-time never 
avails itself of the horizen by which such things as world, significance, 
and datability can bemade accessible. These structures necessarily remain 
covered un, ai! the more so because this covering-up is reinforced by the 
vay in which the ordinary interpretation develops its characterization of 
lame conceptually. 

The sequence of “‘tiows” is taken as something that is somehow present- 
at-hand, for if even moves ‘into time’.! We say: ‘In every “now” is now; 
is every “row” it is alveady vanishing.’ In every “now” the “row” is now 
and therefyrt it constanuy has presence as something selfsame, even though 
in every now” another may be vanishing as it comes along.” Yet as this 
thing which changes, it simultaneously shows its own constant presence. 
‘thus even Plato, who directed his glance in this manner at time as a 
sequence of “‘nows” arising and passing away, had to call time ‘the 
image of eternity”: einw 8 drevde Kırmröv mwa aldvos moroa, Kat 
dtaxoapav dua ovparoy moie? evorros aidvos ev Evi kar apiOpov tobcary 
alcyyıor etxova, ToUToy Gv 8) ypdvoy wyvoudKnapev.* 

The sequence of“‘'nows” is uninterrupted and has no gaps. No matter how 
‘far’ we proceed in ‘dividing up’ the “now”, it is always now. The con- 
tinuity® of time isseen within the horizon of something which is indissolubly 


1‘. , , denn sie rückt selbst “in die Zeit”? 

® ‘In jedem Jetzt ist das Jetzt Jetzt, mithin ständig als Selbiges anwesend, mag auch in 
jedem Jetzt je ein anderes ankommend verschwinden.’ 

3 ‘Stetigkeit’. In the earlier editions this ap as ‘Statigkeit’—a spelling which we 
find on H. 390 f. and 398 in both earlier and later Aioni. fe t is not clear how seriously 
this ‘correction’ is to be taken herc; but we have decided, with some hesitation, to trans- 
late ‘Statigkeit’ as ‘steadiness’, and ‘stetig’ and ‘Stetigkeit’ as ‘continuous’ and ‘continuity’ 
respectively, saving ‘Continuous’ and ‘Continuity’ for ‘kontinuierlich’ and ‘Kontinuitat’, 


423 


424 


476 Being and Time 11. 6 


present-at-hand. When one takes one’s ontological orientation from 
something that is constantly present-at-hand, one either looks for the 
problem of the Continuity of time or one leaves this impasse alone. In 
either case the specific structure of world-time must remain covered up. 
Together with datability (which has an ecstatical foundation) it has been 
spanned. The spannedness of time is not to be understood in terms of the 
horizonal stretching-along of the ecstatical unity of that temporality which 
has made itself public in one’s concern with time. The fact that in every 
“now”, no matter how momentary, it is in each case already now, must be 
conceived in terms of something which is ‘earlier’ stil! and from which 
every “now” stems: that is to say, it must be conceived in terms of the 
ecstatical stretching-along of that temporality which is alien to any 
Continuity of something present-at-hand but which, for its part, presents 
the condition for the possibility of access to anything continuous? that is 
present-at-hand. 

The principal thesis of the ordinary way of interpreting time—namely, 
that time is ‘infinite’-—makes manifest most impressively the way in which 
world-time and accordingly temporality in general have been levelled off 
and covered up by such an interpretation. It is held that time presents 
itself proximally as an uninterrupted sequence of ‘“nows”. Every “now”, 
moreover, is already either a “‘just-now” or a “forthwith”’.? If in charac- 
terizing time we stick primarily and exclusively to such a sequence, then 
in principle neither beginning nor end can be found in it. Every last 
“now”, as “now”, is always already a “forthwith” that is no longer [ein 
Sofort-nicht-mehr]; thus it is time in the sense of the “‘no-longer-now”— 
in the sense of the past. Every first “now” is a “‘just-now” that is not yet 
[ein Soeben-noch-nicht]; thus it is time in the sense of the “not-yet- 
now’’—in the sense of the ‘future’. Hence time is endless ‘on both sides’. 
This thesis becomes possible only on the basis of an orientation towards a 
free-floating ““in-ıtself” of a course of “nows? which is present-at-hand—an 
orientation in which the full phenomenon of the “now” has been covered 
up with regard to its datability, its worldhood, its spannedness, and its 
character of having a location of the same kind as Dasein’s, so that it has 
dwindled to an unrecognizable fragment. If one directs one’s glance 
towards Being-present-at-hand and not-Being-present-at-hand, and thus 
‘thinks’ the sequence of ‘“‘nows” through ‘to the end’, then an end can 
never be found. In this way of thinking time through to the end, one must 
always think more time; from this one infers that time is infinite. 

But wherein are grounded this levelling-off of world-time and this 


1‘... Steigen... -' The earlier editions have ‘Stitigen’. 
3 ‘Jedes Jutet int auch schon ein Soeben bzw Sofort.’ 


11. 6 Being and Time 477 


covering-up of temporality? In the Being of Dasein itself, which we have, 
in a preparatory manner, Interpreted as care.*1 Thrown and falling, 
‘ Dasein is proximally and for the most part lost in that with which it 
concerns itself. In this lostness, however, Dasein’s fleeing in the face of 
that authentic existence which has been characterized as ‘‘anticipatory 
resoluteness’’, has made itself known; and this is a fleeing which covers up. 
In this concernful fleeing lies a fleeing in the face of death—that is, a 
looking-away from the end of Being-in-the-world.*!i This looking-away 
from it, is in itselfa mode of that Being-towards-the-end which is ecstatically 
futural. ‘The inauthentic temporality of everyday Dasein as it falls, must, as 
such a looking-away from finitude, fail to recognize authentic futurity and 
therewith temporality in general. And if indeed the way, in which Dasein 
is ordinarily understood is guided by the “they”, only so can the self- 
forgetful ‘representation’ of the ‘infinity’ of public time be strengthened. 
The “they” never dies because it canfiot die; for death is in each case mine, 
and only in anticipatory resoluteness does it get authentically understood 
in an existentiell manner. Nevertheless, the “they”, which never dies and 
which misunderstands Being-towards-the-end, gives a characteristic inter- 
pretation to fleeing in the face of death. To the very end ‘it always has 
more time’. Here a way of “having time” in the sense that one can lose it 
makes itself known. ‘Right now, this! then that! And that is barely over, 
when ...’! Here it is not as if the finitude of time were getting understood ; 
quite the contrary, for concern sets out to snatch as much as possible from 
the time which still keeps coming and ‘goes on’. Publicly, time is something 
which everyone takes and can take. In the everyday way in which we are 
with one another, the levelled-off sequence of ‘‘nows’’ remains completely 
unrecognizable as regards its origin in the temporality of the individual 
Dasein. How is ‘time’ in its course to be touched even the least bit when a 
man who has been present-at-hand ‘in time’ no longer exists ?* Time goes 
on, just as indeed it already ‘was’ when a man ‘came into life’. The only 
time one knows is the public time which has been levelled off and which 
belongs to everyone—and that means, to nobody. 

But just as he who flees in the face of death is pursued by it even as 
he evades it, and just as in turning away from it he must see it none the 
less, even the innocuous infinite sequence of ‘‘nows” which simply runs 
its course, imposes itself ‘on’ Dasein in a remarkably enigmatical way.’ 


23 


1‘. “Jetzt erst noch das, dann das, und nur noch das und dann... .’ 

2 ‘Die nivellierte Jetztfolge bleibt völlig unkenntlich bezüglich ihrer Herkunft aus der 
Zeitlichkeit des einzelnen Daseins im alltäglichen Miteinander. Wie soll das auch “die 
Zeit” im mindesten in ihrem Gang berühren, wenn ein “in der Zeit’? vorhandener 
Mensch nicht mehr existiert?’ 

9‘... so legt sich auch die lediglich ablaufende, harmlose, unendliche Folge der Jetzt 
doch in einer merkwürdigen Rätselhaftigkeit “über” das Dasein.’ 


425 


426 


478 Being and Time 11.6 


Why do we say that time passes away, when we do not say with just as much 


emphasis that it arises? Yet with regard to the pure sequence of “nows’” 


we have as much right to say one as the other. When Dasein talks of time's. 
passing away, it understands, in the end, more of time than it wants to 

admit; that is to say, the temporality in which world-time temporalizes 

itself has not been completely closed off, no matter how much it may get 

covered up. Our talk about time’s passing-away gives expresion to this- 
‘experience’: time does not let itself be halted. This ‘experience’ in turn 

is possible only because the halting of time is something that we want. 

Herein lies an inauthentic awaiting of ‘moments’—an awaiting in which 

these are already forgotten as they glide by. The awaiting of inauthentic 

existence—the awaiting which forgets as it makes present—is the condition 
for the possibility of the ordinary experience of time’s passing-away. 

Because Dasein is futural in the “ahead-of-itself”, it must, in awaiting, 

understand the sequence of “nows” as one which glides by as it passes 
away. Dasein knows fugitive time in terms of its ‘fugitive’ Knowledge about its 
death. In the kind of talk which emphasizes time’s passing away, the finite 
futurity of Dasein’s temporality is publicly reflected. And because even in 
talk about time’s passing away, death can remain covered up, time shows 
itself as a passing-away ‘in itself”. 

But even in this pure sequence of “‘nows” which passes away in itself, 
primordial time still manifests itself throughout all this levelling off and 
covering up. In the ordinary interpretation, the stream of time is defined . 
as an irreversible succession. Why cannot time be reversed ? Especially if one 
looks exclusively at the stream of “‘nows’’, it is incomprehensible in itself. 
why this sequence should not present itself in the reverse direction. The 
impossibility of this reversal has its basis in the way public time originates 
in temporality, the temporalizing of which is primarily futural and ‘goes’ 
to its end ecstatically in such a way that it ‘is’ already towards its end. 

The ordinary way of characterizing time as an endless, irreversible 
sequence of “nows’’ which passes away, arises from the temporality of 
falling Dasein. The ordinary representation of time has its natural justification. It 
belongs to Dasein’s average kind of Being, and to that understanding of 
Being which proximally prevails. Thus proximally and for the most part, 
even history gets understood publicly as happening within-time.! This inter- 
pretation of time loses its exclusive and pre-eminent justification only if 
it claims to convey the ‘true’ conception of time and to be able to prescribe 
the sole possible horizon within which time is to. be Interpreted. On the 
contrary, it has emerged that why and'how world-time belongs to ‘Dasein’s 


1 ‘Daher wird auch zunächst und zumeist die Geschichte. öffentlich als innerzeitiges Gesche- 
her. verstanden.’ The words ‘öffentlich als’ arc italicized only in the later editions. 


11.6 Being and Time 479 


| temporality is intelligible only in terms of that temporality and its tempor- 


alizirig. From temporality the full structure of world-time has been drawn; 
and only the Interpretation of this structure gives us the clue for ‘seeing’ 
at all that in the ordinary conception of time something has been covered 
up, and for estimating how much the ecstatico-horizonal constitution of 
temporality has been levelled off. This orientation by Dasein’s temporality 
indeed makes it possible to exhibit the origin and the factical necessity of 
this levelling off and covering up, and at the same time to test the argu- 
ments for the ordinary theses about time. 

On the other hand, within the horizon of the way time is ordinarily 
understood, temporality is inaccessible’ in the reverse direction.! Not only must 
the now-time be oriented primarily by temporality in the order of possible 
interpretation, but it temporalizes itself only in the inauthentic tempor- 
ality of Dasein; so if one has regard for the way the now-time is derived 
from temporality, one is justified in considering temporality as the time 
which is primordial. | 

Ecstatico-horizonal temporality temporalizes itself primarily in terms of 
the future. In the way time is ordinarily understood, however, the pase 
phenomenon of time is seen in the “now”, and indeed in that pure “now” 
which has been shorn in its full structure—that which they call the ‘Pre- 


va 


‘sent’, One can gather from this that there is in principle no prospect that 
* in terms of this kind of “now” one can’ clarify the ecstatico-horizonal pheno- 


menon of the moment of vision which belongs to temporality, or even that 


- one can derive it thus. Correspondingly; the future as ecstatically under- 


stood—the datable and significant ' ‘then’—does not coincide with the 
ordinary conception of the ‘future’ -in: ‘the sense of a pure “now” which 
has not yet come along but is only coming along. And the concept of the 


past in, the sense of the pure “now” which has passed away, is just 
. as far from coinciding with the -ecstatical ““having-been”—the datable 


and significant ‘on a former occasion*.: The “now” is not pregnant with 


"ithe “‘not-yet-now’’, but: the Present arises from the future in the prim- 


ordial ecstatical unity of the temporalizing of temporality =! 

Although, proximally and for the most part, the ordinary experience of 
time is one that knows only ‘world-time’, it always gives it a distinctive 
relationship to ‘soul’ and ‘spirit’, even if this is still a far cry from a 
philosophical inquiry. oriented explicitly: and primarily towards the 
‘subject’. As evidence for this, two ¢haracferistic passages will suffice, 
Aristotle says: el ôè undev addro meßuner, gpidjeiv Ñ pux) al fuxis vos, 


| douaron elvat ypóvov vyĝs p) obons.-<.-:4¥ And Saint Augustine writes: 


1 "Dagegen bleibt umgekehrt die Zeitlichkeit’i im. Hoden des vulgären Zeitverständ- 


"> nisses unzugänglich.’ 


jia. 


427 


428 


480 Being and Time II. 6 


““inde mihi visum est, nihil esse aliud tempus quam distentionem ; sed cutus rei nescio; 
et mirum si non ipsius animi.’’*Y Thus in principle even the Interpretation of 
Dasein as temporality does not lie beyond the horizon of the ordinary con- 
ception of time. And Hegel has made an explicit attempt to set forth the way 
in which time as ordinarily understood is connected with spirit. In Kant, 
on the other hand, while time is indeed ‘subjective’, it stands ‘beside’ 
the ‘I think’ and is not bound up with it.*¥! The grounds which Hegel has 
explicitly provided for the connection between time and spirit are well 
suited to elucidate indirectly the foregoing Interpretation of Dasein as 
temporality and our exhibition of temporality as the source of world- 
time. 


T 82. A Comparison of the Existential-ontological Connection of Temporalıty, 
Dasein, and World-time, with Hegel’s Way of Taking the Relation between Time 
and Spirit 

History, which is essentially the history of spirit, runs its course ‘in 
time’. Thus ‘the development of history falls into time’.*vil! Hegel is not 
satisfied, however, with averring that the within-time-ness of spirit is a 
Fact, but seeks to understand how it is possible for spirit to fall into time, 
which is ‘the non-sensuous sensuous’.*Vll Time must be able, as it were, 
to take in spirit. And spirit in turn must be akin to time and its essence, 
Accordingly two points come up for discussion: (1) how does Hegel define 
the essence of time? (2) what belongs to the essence of spirit which makes 
it possible for it to ‘fall into time’ ? Our answer to these questions will serve 
merely to elucidate our Interpretation of Dasein as temporality, and to do 
so by way of a comparison. We shall make no claim to give even a relatively 
full.treatment of the allied problems in Hegel, especially since ‘criticizing’ 
him will not help us. Because Hegel’s conception of time presents the most 
radical way in which the ordinary understanding of time has been given 
form conceptually, and one which has received too little attention, 
a comparison of this conception with the idea of temporality which we 
have expounded is one that especially suggests itself. 


(a) Hegel’s Conception of Time 

When a philosophical Interpretation of time is carried out, it gets a 
‘locus in a system’; this locus may be considered as criterial for the basic 
way of treating time by which such an Interpretation is guided. In the 


t ‘Also fällt die Entwicklung der Geschichte in die Zeit”.’ Throughout this section it 
will be convenient to translate Hegel’s verb ‘fallen’ by ‘fail’, though elsewhere we have 
largely pre-empted this for Heidegger’s ‘verfallen’. ‘Verfallen’ does not appear until H. 
436, where we shall call attention to it explicitly. (In this quotation, as in several others, 
Heidegger has taken a few minor liberties with Hegel’s text, which are too trivial for any 
special comment.) 


IT. 6 Being and Time 481 
‘physics’ of Aristotle—that is, in the context of an ontology of Nature— 
the ordinary way of understanding time has received its first thematically 
detailed traditional interpretation. “Time’, ‘location’, and ‘movement’ 
stand together. True to tradition, Hegel’s analysis of time has its locus 
in the second part of his Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sctences, which is 
entitled ‘Philosophy of Nature’. The first portion of this treats of mechanics, 
and of this the first division is devoted to the discussion of ‘space and time’. 
He calls these ‘the abstract “‘outside-of-one-another”’ ’.*ix 

Though Hegel puts space and time together, this does not happen 
simply because he has arranged them superficially one after the other: 
space, ‘and time also’. ‘Philosophy combats such an “‘also”’.’ The transition 
from space to time does not signify that these are treated in adjoining 
paragraphs; rather ‘it is space itself that makes the transition’.! Space ‘is’ 
time; that is, time is the ‘truth’ of space.** If space is thought dialectically 
in that which it is, then‘according to Hegel this Being of space unveils itself 
as time. How must space be thought? 

Space is ‘the unmediated indifference of Nature’s Being-outside-of- 
itself’.**! This is a way of saying that space is the abstract multiplicity 
[Vielheit] of the points which are differentiable in it.? Space is not 
interrupted by these; but neither does it arise from them by way of 
joining them together. Though it is differentiated by differentiable points 
which are space themselves, space remains, for its part, without any 
differences. The differences themselves are of the same character as that 
which they differentiate. Nevertheless, the point, in so far as it differen- 
tiates anything in space, is the negation of space, though in such a manner 
that, as this negation, it itself remains in space; a point is space after all. 
The point does not lift itself out of space as if it were something of another 
character. Space is the ‘‘outside-of-one-another” of the multiplicity of 
points [Punktmannigfaltigkeit], and it is without any differences. But it 
is not as if space were a point; space is rather, as Hegel says, ‘punctuality’ 
[“Punktualität’’]. **!1 This is the basis for the sentence in which Hegel 
thinks of space in its truth—that is, as time: ‘Negativity, which relates 
itself as point to space, and which develops in space its determinations as 
line and surface, is, however, just as much for itself in the sphere of Being- 
outside-of-itself, and so are its determinations therein, though while it is 


Lt‘... sondern “‘der Raum selbst geht tiber’’.’ 

2‘... in ihm unterscheidbaren Punkte.’ We have often translated ‘unterscheiden’ as 
‘distinguish’ or ‘discriminate’, and ‘Unterschied’ as ‘distinction’ or ‘difference’, leaving 
‘differentiate’ and ‘differentiation’ for such words as ‘differenzieren’ and ‘Differenz’, etc. 
In this discussion of Hegel, however, it will be convenient to translate ‘unterscheiden’ as 
‘differentiate’, ‘Unterschied’ as ‘difference’, ‘unterscheidbar’ as ‘differentiable’, ‘unter- 


schiedslos’ as ‘without differences’. (We shall continue to translate ‘gleichgültig as ‘in- 
different’) 


Q 


429 


430 


482 Being and Time 11.6 
positing as in the sphere of Being-outside-of-itself, it appears indifferent as 
regards the things that are tranquillyside by side. As thus posited for itself, 
it is time Xxiii | 

If space gets represented—that is, if it gets intuited immediately in the 
indifferent subsistence of its differences—then the negations are, as it were, 
simply given. But by such a representafion, space does not get grasped in 
its Being. Only in thinking is it possible for this to be done—in thinking as 
the synthesis which has gone through thesis and antithesis and transmuted 
them. Only if the negations do not simply remain subsisting in their 
indifference but get transmuted—that is, only if they themselves get 
negated—does space get thought and thus grasped in its Being. In the 
negation of the negation (that is, of punctuality) the point posits itself 
for itself and thus emerges from the indifference of subsisting. As that which 
is posited for itself, it differentiates itself from this one and from that one: 
it is no longer this and not yet that. In positing ‘itself for itself, it posits the 
succession in which it stands—the sphere: of Being-outside-of-itself, which 
is by now the sphere of the negated ne ation. When punctuality’ as 
indifference gets transmuted, this signifies tf t it no longer remains lying 
in the ‘paralysed tranquillity of space’. Fhe point ‘gives itself airs’ before 
all the other points.! According to Hegel; this negation of the negation 
as punctuality is time. If this discussion: hat any demonstrable meaning, 


it can mean nothing else than that the posjting-oF-itself-for-itself of every 


now-here”, ‘and go‘ ‚on. Every point ‘is’ posited 
ipt thus has actuality.’ That 


point is a “‘now-here’’, 
for itself as a now-point. ‘In time the ipo 


‚through which each point, as this one here’ ‚can posit itself for itself, is in 
‚each case a “now”. The “now” is the ‘condition for the possibility of the 


point’s positing itself for itself. This possibility-condition makes up the 
Being of the point, and Being is the same: ‚as having been thought. Thus 


.in each case the pure thinking of punctiiality—that i is, of space—‘thinks’ 
the “now” and the Being-outside-of-itself i of the “now”; because of this, 


space ‘is’ time. How is time itself defined?" : 
“Time, as the negative unity of Being-qutside-of itself, is likewise some- 


„thing simply abstract, ideal. It is that Being: which, in that it is, is not, and 
~ which, in that it is not, is: it is intuitéd ‘becoming. This means that 
those differences which, to be sure, are simply momentary, transmuting 
themselves immediately, are defined as external ‚yet as external to them- 


431° : 


selves.’**v For this interpretation, time reveals itself as ‘intuited: becom- 
ing’. According to Hegel this signifies a transition frorn Being to nothing 
-or from nothing to Being.x*v Becoming is both arising and passing away. 


1 ‘Der Punkt “spreizt sich auf” gegenüber allen anderen Punkten.’ The verb ‘ spreizen’ 
means ‘to spread apart’; but when used ane as here, it takes on the more specific 
“connotation of swaggering, giving oneself airs. 


I.6 ° Being and Time 483 
Either Being ‘makes the transition’, or not-Being does sc. What does this 
mean with regard to time? The Being of time is the “now”. Every ‘‘now”, 
however, either ‘now’ is-no-longer, or now is-not-yct; so it can be taken also 
as not-Being.? Time is ‘intwzted’ becoming—that is to say, it is the transition 
which does not get thought but which simply tenders itself in the sequence 
of “nows”. If the essence of time is defined as ‘intuited becoming’, then it 
becomes manifest that time is primarily understood in terms of the 
“now”, and indeed in the very manner in which one comes across such a 
“now” in pure intuition. 

No detailed discussion is needed to make plain that in Hegel’s Inter- 
pretation of time he is moving wholly in the direction of the way time is 
ordinarily understood. When he characterizes time in terms of the “now”, 
this presupposes that in its full structure the “now” reinains levelled off 
and covered up, so that it can be intuited as something present-at-hand, 
though present-at-hand only ‘ideally’. 

That Hegel Interprets time in terms of this primary orientation by the 
“now” which has been levelled off, is evidenced by the following 
sentences: ‘The “now” is monstrously privileged: it ‘is’ nothing but the 
individual ‘“‘now’’; but in giving itself airs, this thing which is so exclusive 
has already been dissolved, diffused, and pulverized, even while I am 
expressing it.’ xxvi ‘In Nature, moreover, where time is now, no “stable” 
[“bestehend”] difference between these dimensions’ (past and future) 
‘ever comes about’.**vil ‘Thus in a positive sense one can say of time that 
only the Present is; the “before” and “after” are not; but the concrete 
Present is the result of the past and is pregnant with the future. Thus the 
true Present is eternity.’**vill 

If Hegel calls time ‘intuited becoming’, then neither arising nor passing 
away has any priority in time. Nevertheless, on occasion he characterizes 
time as the ‘abstraction of consuming’ [‘‘Abstraktion des Verzehrens’’]— 
the most radical formula for the way in which time is ordinaiily experi- 
enced and interpreted.*** On the other hand, when Hegel really défines 
“time”, he is consistent enough to grant no such priority to consuming 
and passing away as that which the everyday way of experiencing time 
rightly adheres to; for Hegel can no more provide dialectical grounds for 
such a priority than he can for the ‘circumstance’ (which he has intro- 
duced as self-evident) that the “now” turns up precisely in the way the 
point posits itself for itself. So even when he characterizes time as “be- 
coming”, Hegel understands this “becoming” in an ‘abstract’ sense, 
which goes well beyond the representation of the ‘stream’ of time. Thus 


1 ‘Das Sein der Zeit ist das Jetzt; sofern aber jedes Jetzt “jetzt” auch schon nicht-mehr- 
„bzw. je jetzt zuvor noch-nicht-ist, kann es auch als Nichtsein gefasst werden.’ 


432 


433 


434 


484 Being and Time II. 6 


the most appropriate expression which the Hegelian treatment of time 
receives, lies in his defining it as ‘‘the negation of a negation” (that is, of 
punctuality). Here the sequence of ‘‘nows’’ has been formalized in the 
most extreme sense and levelled off in such a way that one can hardly go 
any farther.** Only from the standpoint of this formal-dialectical con- 
ception of time can Hegel produce any connection between time and 
spirit. 


(b) Hegel’s Interpretation of the Connection between Time and Spirit 


If Hegel can say that when spirit gets actualized, it accords with it to 
fall into time, with “time” defined as a negation of a negation, how has 
spirit itself been understood? The essence of spirit is the concept. By this 
Hegel understands not the universal which is intuited in a genus as the 
form of something thought, but rather the form of the very thinking which 
thinks itself: the conceiving of oneself—as the grasping of the not-I. Inasmuch 
as the grasping of the not-I presents a differentiation, there lies in the pure 
concept, as the grasping of this differentiation, a differentiation of the 
difference. Thus Hegel can define the essence of the spirit formally and 
apophantically as the negation of a negation. This ‘absolute negativity’ 
gives a logically formalized Interpretation of Descartes’ ‘‘cogtto me cogttare 
rem’’, wherein he sees the essence of the conscientta. 

The concept is accordingly a self-conceiving way in which the Self has 
been conceived; as thus conceived, the Self is authentically as it can be— 
that is free. “The “I” is the pure concept itself, which as concept has come 
into Dasein.’***! ‘The “I”, however, is this initially pure unity which relates 
itself to itself—not immediately, but in that it abstracts from all deter- 
minateness and content, and goes back to the freedom of its unrestricted 
self-equality.***11 Thus the “I” is ‘universality’, but it is ‘individuality’? 
just as immediately. 

This negating of the negation is both that which is ‘absolutely restless’ 
in the spirit and also its self-manifestation, which belongs to its essence. The 
‘progression’ of the spirit which actualizes itself in history, carries with it 
‘a principle of exclusion’. œx In this exclusion, however, that which is 
excluded does not get detached from the spirit; it gets surmounted. The kind 


1 ‘Der Begriff ist sonach die sich begreifende ee des Selbst, als welche das 
Selbst eigentlich ist, wie es sein kann, das heisst The noun ‘Begriffenheit’ is of course 
derived from ‘begriffen’, the past participle o ‘begreifen’ (‘to conceive’ or ‘to grasp’). 
‘Begriffen’, however, may also be used when we would say that someone is ‘in the process 
of’ doing something. This would suggest the alternative translation: “The concept is 
accordingly a self-conceiving activity of the Self—an Eye of such a nature that when 
the Self performs it, it is authentically as it can be—namely, 

2 * “Einzelheit”” '. We take this reading from Lasson’s edition of Hegel, which Heidegger 
cites. The older editions of Heidegger’s work have ‘Einzelnheit’; the newer ones have 
‘Einzenheit’. Presumably these are both misprints. 


11.6 Being and Time 485 
of making-itself-free which overcomes and at the same time tolerates, is 
characteristic of the freedom a the spirit. Thus ‘progress’ never signifies 
a merely quantitative ‘ “more”, but is essentially qualitative and indeed 
has the quality of spirit. PIOBIC Jon. is done knowingly and knows itself 
in its goal. In every step of its ‘progress’ spirit has to overcome ‘itself’ 

“as the truly malignant obstacle to that goal’’.xxxlv In its aeveiopmeni 
spirit aims ‘to reach its own concept’.xx*v The development itself is ‘a hard, 
unending battle against itself?.xxxv! 

Because the restlessness with which spirit develops in bringing itself to 
its concept is. the negation of a negation, it accords with spirit, as it actualizes 
itself, to fall ‘into time’ as the immediate negation of a negation. For ‘time is 
the concept itself, which is there He ist] and which represents itself to the 
consciousness as an empty intuition; because of this, spirit necessarily 
appears in time, and it appears in time as long as it does not grasp its pure 
concept—that is, as long as time is not annulled by it. Time is the pure 
Self-external, intuited, not grasped by the Self—the concept which is merely 
intuited.’**xvll Thus by its very essence spirit necessarily appears in time. 
‘World-history is therefore, above all, the interpretation of spirit in time, 
just as in space the idea interprets itself as Nature.’**xvii The ‘exclusion’ 
which belongs to the movement of development harbours in itself a 
relationship to not-Being. This is time, understood in terms of the “now” 
which gives itself airs. 

Time is ‘abstract’ negativity. As ‘intuited becoming’, it is the differen- 
tiated self-differentiation which one comes across immediately; it is the 
concept which ‘is there’ [‘‘daseiende”]—but this means present-at-hand. 
As something present-at-hand and thus external to spirit, time has no 
power over the concept, but the concept is rather ‘the power of time’.***!x 

By going back to the selfsameness of the formal structure which both spirit and 
time possess as the negation of a negation, Hegel shows how it is possible for 
spirit to be actualized historically ‘in time’. Spirit and time get disposed 
of with the very emptiest of formal-ontological and formal-apophantical 
abstractions, and this makes it possible to produce a’ kinship between 
them. But because time simultaneously gets conceived in the sense of a 
world-time which has been utterly levelled off, so that its origin remains 
completely concealed, it simply gets contrasted with spirit—contrasted as 
something that is present-at-hand. Because of this, spirit must first of all 
fall ‘into time’. It remains obscure what indeed is signified ontologically 
by this ‘falling’ or by the ‘actualizing’ of a spirit which has power over 
time and really ‘is’ [“‘seienden”’] outside of it. Just as Hegel casts little light on 
the source of the time which has thus been levelled off, he leaves totally 
unexamined the question of whether the way in which spirit is essentially 


435 


436 


486 Being and Time IL. 6 


constituted as the negating of a negation, is possible in any other manner 
than on the basis of primordial temporaiity, 

We cannot as yet discuss whether Hegel’s Interpretation of time and 
spirit and the connection between them is correct and rests on foundations 
which are ontologically primordial. But the very fact that a formal- 
dialectical ‘construction’ of this connection can be ventured at all, makes 
manifest that these are primordially akin. Hegel’s ‘construction’ was 
prompted by his arduous struggle to conceive the ‘concretion’ of the spirit. 
He makes this known in the following sentence from the concluding 
chapter of his Phenomenology of the Spirit: “Thus time appears as the very 
fate and necessity which spirit has when it is not in itself complete: the 
necessity of its giving self-consciousness a richer share in consciousness, of 
its setting in motion the immediacy of the “in-itself” (the form in which 
substance is in consciousness), or, conversely, of its realizing and making 
manifest the “‘in-itself”’ taken as the inward (and this is what first is inward) 
—that is, of vindicating it for its certainty of itself.’*! 

Our existential analytic of Dasein, on the contrary, starts with the 
‘concretion’ of factically thrown existence itself in order to unveil 'tem- 
porality as that which primordially makes such existence possible. ‘Spirit’ 
does not first fall into time, but it exists as the primordial temporalt zing 
of temporality. Temporality temparalizes world-time, within the horizon 
of which ‘history’ can ‘appear’ as historizing within-time. ‘Spirit’ does not 
fall into time; but factical existence “falle” as falling from primordial, 
authentic temporality.! This ‘falling’ [‘‘Fallen’’], however, has itself its 
existential possibility in a mode of its temporalizing—a mode which 
belongs to temporality. 


T 83. The Existential-temporal Analytic of Dasein, and the Question of Funda- 
mental Ontology as to the Meantng of Being in General 


In our considerations hitherto, our task has been to Interpret the 
primordial whole of factical Dasein with regard to its possibilities of authentic 
and inauthentic existing, and to do so in anexistential-ontological manner 
in terms of its very basts. Temporality has manifested itself as this basis and 
accordingly as the meaning of the Being of care. So that which our 
preparatory existential analytic of Dasein contributed before temporality 
was laid bare, has now been taken back into temporality as the primordial 
structure of Dasein’s totality of Being. In terms of the possible ways in 


which primordial time can temporalize itself, we have provided the 
1 ‘Der “Geist” fällt nicht in die Zeit, sondern: die faktische Existenz “fällt” als ver- 
fallende aus der ursprünglichen, eigentlichen Zeitlichkeit.’ The contrast between He 


verb ‘fallen’ and eee s ‘verfallen’ is obscured by our translating them both as ‘ 
Cf. our note 1, p. 480, 


+ 


Il. 6 Being and Time 487 


‘grounds’ for those structures which were just ‘pointed out’ in our earlier 
treatment. Nevertheless, our way of exhibiting the constitution of Dasein’s 
Being remains only one way which we may take. Our aim is to work out the 
question of Being in general. The thematic analytic of existence, however, 
first needs the light of the idea of Being in general, which must be clarified 
beforehand. This holds particularly if we adhere to the principle which we 
expressed in our introduction as one by which any philosophical investiga- 
tion may be gauged: that philosophy “is universal phenomenological 
ontology, and takes its departure from the hermeneutic of Dasein, which, 
as an analytic of existence, has made fast the guiding-line for all philo- 
sophical inquiry at the point where it arises and to which it returns. x 
This thesis, of course, is to be regarded not as a dogma, but rather as a 
formulation of a problem of principle which still remains ‘veiled’: can 
one provide ontological grounds for ontology, or does it also require an 
ontical foundation? and which entity must take over the function of pro- 
viding this foundation ? 

The distinction between the Being of existing Dasein and the Being of 
entities, such as Reality, which do not have the character of Dasein, may 
appear very illuminating; but it is still only the point of departure for the 
ontological problematic; it is nothing with which philosophy may tranquil- 
lize itself. It has long been known that ancient ontology works with “Thing- 
concepts’ and that there is a danger of ‘reifying consciousness’. But what 
does this “reifying”’ signify ? Where does it arise ? Why does Being get ‘con- 
ceived’ ‘proximally’ in terms of the present-at-hand and not in terms of the 
ready-to-hand, which indeed lies closer to us? Why does this reifying always 
keep coming back to exercise its dominion? What positive structure does 
the Being of ‘consciousness’ have, if reification remains inappropriate to 
it? Is the ‘distinction’ between ‘consciousness’ and ‘Thing’ sufficient for 
tackling the ontological problematic in a primordial manner? Do the 
answers to these questions lie along our way? And can we even seek 
the answer as long as the question of the meaning of Being remains unformu- 
lated and unclarified ? 

One can never carry on researches into the source and the possibility of 
the ‘idea’ of Being in general simply by means of the ‘abstractions’ of 
formal logic—that is, without any secure horizon for question and answer, 
One must seek a way of casting light on the fundamental question of onto- 
logy, and this is the way one must go. Whether this is the only way or even 
the right one at all, can be decided only after one. has gone along it. The 
conflict as to the Interpretation of Being cannot be allayed, because it has 
not yet been enkindled. And in the end this is not the kind of conflict one 
can ‘bluster into’; it is of the kind which cannot get enkindled unless 


437 


488 i Being and Time i IL. 6 
preparations are made for it. Towards this alone the foregoing investiga- 
tion is on the way. And where does this investigation stand ? 

Something like ‘Being’ has been disclosed in the understanding-of- 
Being which belongs to existent Dasein as a way in which it understands, 
Being has been disclosed in a preliminary way, though non-conceptually; 
and this makes it possible for Dasein as existent Being-in-the-world to 
comport itself towards entities—-towards those which it encounters within- 
the-world as well as towards itself as existent. How ıs this disclosive under- 
standing of Being at all possible for Dasein? Can this question be answered by 
going back to the primordial constitution-of-Being of that Dasein by which 
Being is understood ? The existential-ontological constitution of Dasein’; 
totality is grounded in tempcrality. Hence the ecstatical projection of 
Being must be made possible by some primordial way in which ecstatical 
temporality temporalizes. How is this mode of the temporalizing of 
temporality to be Interpreted ? Is there a way which leads from primordial 
time to the meaning of Being? Does time itself manifest itself as the horizon 
of Being? 


AUTHOR ’S NOTES 


-. - 


Foreword 

1. (H. 1) Plato, Sophistes 2442. 

Introduction, Cachter Gre 

1. (H. 3) Aristotle, Metaphysica B 4, 1001 a 27. 

ii. (H. 3) Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica 114 TI. a4 ari. 2. 

ni. (H. 3) Aristotle, Metaphysica E 3, 998 b ir. 

iv, (H. 4) Cf. Pascal, Pensées et Opuscules (ed. Brunschvices}* Faris, ıgı2, c, 166, ‘On ne 
peut entreprendre de définir l’ötre sans tomber dans eette absurdité: car on ne peut 
défnir un mot sans commencer par celui-ci, c'est, soit qu'on Vexprime ov qu’dn Je 
sous-entende. Donc pour définir l'être, il faudrait dire c’est, et ainsı employer le mot 
défini dans sa definition.’ 

v. (H. 6) Plato, Sophistes 242c. 

vi. (H. 14) Aristotle, De Anima I 8. 431 b 21; ci. ibid. Tr, 430 a 14 N. 

vii. (H. 14) Thomas Aquinas, Quoestiones de Veriiate. a. I, alc. cf the somewhat different 
and in part more rigorous way in which he carries out a ‘deduction’ of the transcendentia 
in his opuscule ‘De Natura Generis’. 


Introduction, Chapter Two 

i. (H. 23) I. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason,* pp. 180 f. 

ii. (H. 26) Aristotle, Physica A 10-14 (217b 29-224a 17). 

ii. (H. 26) I. Kant, 23. cit., p. rar. 

iv. (H. 32) Cf. Aristotle, De Interpretatione 1—6; also Metaphysica Z 4, and Ethica Nico- 
machea Z 

v. (H. 38) If the following investigation has taken any steps forward in disclosing the 
‘things themselves’, ihe author must first of aR tharik E. Husseri, who, by providing his 
own incisive personal guidance and by freely turning over his unpublished investiga- 
tions, familiarized the author with the most diverse areas of phenomenological research 
during his student years in Freiburg. 


Division One, Chapter One 


i. (H. 44) St. Augustine, Confessiones, X, 16. [‘But what is closer to me than myself? 
Assuredly I labour here and I labour within myself; I have become to myself a land of 
trouble and inordir:aie sweat.’—Tr. ] 

ii. (H. 47) Edmund Husserl’s investigations of the ‘personality’ have not as yet been 
published. The basic orientation of his problematic is apparent as early as his paper 
‘Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft’, Logos, vol. I, 1g10, p. 319. His investigation was 
carried much further in the second part of his Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie 
und phanomenologischen Philosophie (Husserliana IV), of which the first part (Cf. this 
Jahrbuch [Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung—Tr.) vol. I, 1913), 
presents the problematic of ‘pure consciousness’ as the basis for studying the Con- 
stitution of any Reality whatsoever. His detailed Constitutional analyses are to be 
found in three sections of the second part, where he treats: 1, the Constitution of 
material Nature; 2. the Constitution of animal Nature; 3. the Constitution of the 
spiritual world (the personalistic point of view as opposed to the naturalistic). Husserl 
begins with the words: ‘Although Dilthey grasped the problems which point the way, 
and saw the directions which the work to be done would have to take, he still failed to 
penetrate to any decisive formulations of these problems, or to any solutions of them 
which are methodologically correct.’ Husserl has studied these problems still more 
deeply since this first treatment of them; essential portions of his work have been 
communicated in his Freiburg lectures. 


Being and Time 


iii, H 47) This Jahrbuch, vol. I, 2, 1913, and II, 1916; cf. especially pp. 242 fl. 

vi E ees I, wn 4 

Y, 47) Cf. Logos I, toc. cit. 

vi. (H. j Ibid., p. 246. , , 

vii. (H. Gemsis I, 26. [‘And God said, “Let us make man in our image, after our 

i "Ty, # 
viii. (H. 49) Catoin, Institutio I, XV, S:ction 8. [‘Man’s first condition was excellent 
use of the- outstanding endowments: that reason, intelligence, prudence, judg- 
ment should sui:ce not only for the govex::>.ent of this earthly life, but thai by them he 
t beyend, even unto God and to « *>rnal felicity.’ —Tr.} 

ix. (H. 49) Zwing:. Von der Klarheit des “s'ori:s Gottes (Deutsche Schrifun 1, 56". [“Because 
man nô to God and his Word, he ırıdicates clearly that in his ver, Nature he is 
born somewhat .ioser to God, is something more after his stamp, that he has something 
that draws him : God—all this comes beyond a doubt from his having beer created in 
God's image.’ — Ir.) 

x. (H. 50) But to disclose the a priori is 1:5: to make an ‘a-prioristic’ construction, Edmund 
Husser] has noi only ena us to ur derstand once more the meaning of any genuine 
philosophical empiricism; he has aise given us the necessary tools. “A-priortsm’ is the 
method of every scientific philosophy which understands itself. There is nothing 
constructivistic about it. But for this very reason a priori research requires that the 
phenomenal basis be properly prepa ed. The horizon which is closes: to us, and which 
must be made ready for the analytic of Dasein, lies in its average cverydayness. 

xi. (H. 51) Ernst Cassirer has recently made the Dasein of myth a theme for philosophical 

Interpretation. (See his Philosophie der symbolischen Formen, vol. II, Das mythische Denken, 

1925.) In this study, clues of far-reaching importance are made avilable for ethno- 

logical research. From the standpoint of philosophical problematics it remains an open 

question whether the foundations of this Interpretation are sufficiently transparent— 
whether in particular the architectonics and the general systematic content of Kant’s 

Critique of Pure Reason can provide a possible design for such a task, or whether a new 

and more primordial approach may not here be needed. That Cassirer himself sees the 

possibility of such a task is shown by his note on pp. 16 ff., where he alludes to the 
phenomenological horizons disclosed by Husserl. In a discussion between the author and 

Cassirer on the occasion of a lecture before the Hamburg section of the Kanigesellschaft 

in December 1923 on “Tasks and Pathways of Phenomenologfcal Research’, it was 

already apparent that we agreed in demanding an existential analytic such as was 
sketched in that lecture. 


Division One, Chapter Two 


i. (H. 54) Cf. Jakob Grimm, Kleinere Schriften, vol. VII, p. 247. 
ii. (H. 56) Cf. Section 29. 


Division One, Chapter Three 

i, (H. 72) The author may remark that this analysis of the environment and in general 
the ‘hermeneutic of the facticity’ of Dasein, have been presented repeatedly in his 
lectures since the winter semester of 1919-1920. 

ii. (H. 77) Cf. E. Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen 
Philosophie, 1. Teil, this Yearbook [Jahrbuch für. Philosophie und Phänomenologischs 
Forschung} vol. I, Section 10 ff., as well as his Logische Untersuchungen, vol. I, Ch. 11. For 
the analysis of signs and signification see ibid., vol. II, I, Ch. ı. 

iii. (H. go) Descartes, Principia Philosophiae, I, Pr. 53. (Œuvres, ed. Adam and Tannery, 
vol. VIII, p. 25.) [‘And though substance is indeed known by some attribute, yet for 
each substance there is pre-eminently one property which constitutes its nature and 
essence, and to which all the rest are referred.’—Tr. 

iv. (H. go) Ibid. (“Indeed extension in length, breadth, and thickness constitutes the nature 
of corporeal substance.’ The emphasis is Heidegger’s.—Tr.} 

v. a 9) Ibid. [‘For everything else that can be ascribed to body presupposes extension.’ 
—Tr. 

vi. (H. go) Ibid., Pr. 64, p. 31. [‘And one and the same body can be extended in many 
different ways while retaining the same quantity it had before; surely it can sometimes 
be greater in length and less in breadth or thickness, while later it may, on the contrary, 
be greater in breadth and less in length.’—Tr. ] 


Being and Time 491 


vii. (H. 91) Zbid., Pr. 65, p. 32. [*. . . if we think of nothing except what his a place, and 
do not ask about the force by which it is set in motion . . .'—Tr.] 

viii. (H. g1) Ibid., II, Pr. 4. p. 42. {‘For, so far as hardness is concerned, ti: sense shows 
us nothing else about it than that portions of hard bodies resist the movement of our 
hands when they come up against those portions. iʻor if whenever our hands are moved 
towards a certuin portion, all the bodies there should retreat with the same velocity 
as that with which our hands approach, we should never feel any hardness. Nor is it in 
any way intelligble that bodies which thus recede should accordingly lose their cor- 
poreal nature; hence this does not consist in hardness.’ —Tr.] 

ix. (H. 91) Jbi¢. (‘And by the same reasoning it can be shown that weight and colour 
and all the othér qualities of this sort which are sensed in corporcal matter, can be 
taken away trom it, while that matter remains entire; it follows that the nature of this 
<viz. of extension > depends upon none of these.’—Tr.] 

x. (H. g2) /bid., I, pr. 51, p. 24. (‘Indeed we perceive that no other things exist without 
the help of God’s concurrence.’—Tr.] 

xi. (H. 92) Zbid. ['. . . only one substance which is in need of nothing whatsoever, can be 
understood, and this indeed is God.’—Tr.] 

xii. (H. 92) Ibid. (‘Indeed we perceive that other things cannot exist without the help of 
God’s concurrence.’—Tr. ] 

xiii. (H. 93) Zbid. [The complete passage may be translated as follows: ‘The name “‘sub- 
stance” is not appropriate to God and to these univocally, as they say in the Schools; 
that is, no signification of this name which would be common to both God and his 
creation can be distinctly understood.’—Tr. ] 

xiv. (H. 93) In this connection, cf. Opuscula omnia Thomae de Vio Caietani Cardinalis, Lug- 
duni, 1580, Tomus III, Tractatus V ; ‘de nominum analogia’, pp. 211-219. 

xv. (H. 93) Descartes, op. cit., 1, Pr. 51, p. 24. [‘No signification of this name < ‘‘substance” > 
which would be common to God and his creation can be distinctly understood.’—Tr. } 

xvi. (H. 94) Ibid., I, Pr. 52, p. 25. (“Yet substance cannot first be discovered merely by the 
fact that it is a thing that exists, for this alone by itself does not affect us.'—Tr.] 

xvii. (H. 94) Jbid., I, Pr. 63, p. 31. [“Indeed we understand extended substance, or think- 
ing substance more easily than substance alone, disregarding that which thinks or is 
extended.’—Tr. 

xviii, (H. 96) Zbid., II, Pr. 3, p. 41. ["It will be enough if we point out that the eptions 
of the senses are not referred to anything but the union of the human body with the 
mind, and that indeed they ordinarily show us in what way external bodies can be of 
help to it or do it harm.’—Tr.] 

xix. (H. 97) Ibid., II, Pr. 3, pp. 41-42. [‘. .. but they do not teach us what kinds of things 
<bodies> exist in themselves.’—Tr.] 

xx. (H. 97) Jbid., II, Pr. 4, p. 42. [‘If we do this, we shall perceive that the nature of 
matter, or of body as regarded universally, does not consist in its being something hard 
or heavy or coloured or affecting the senses in some other way, but only in its being 
something extended in length, breadth, and thickness.’—Tr.] 

xxi. (H. 109) Immanuel Kant: ‘Was Heisst: Sich im Denken orientieren?’ (1786) Werke 
(Akad. Aus, abe) Vol. VII, pp. 131-147. 

xxii. (H. 112) Cf. O. Becker, Beiträge zur phänomenologischen Begründung de Geometrie und 
ihrer physikalischen Anwendungen, in this Yearbook [ Jahrbuch für Philosofhie und phäno- 
menologische Forschung], vol. VI (1923), pp. 385 ff. 


Diviston One, Chapter Four 


i. (H. 116) Cf. what Max Scheler has pointed out phenomenglogically in his Zur Phdno- 
menologie und Theorie der Sympathiegefühle, 1913, Anhang, pp. 118 ff.; see also his second 

' edition under the title Wesen und Formen der Symy-athie, 1923, PP. 244 ff. 

i. (HI. 119) ‘Ober die Verwandtschaft der Ortsadverbien mit dem Pronomen in einigen 
Sprachen’ (1829), Gesammelte Schriften (published by the Prussian Acaderay of Sciences), 
vol. VI, Part 1, pp. 304-330. 


Division One, Chapter Five 
i (H. 191) Cf. Section 12, H. 52 ff. 
ii. (H. 131) Cf. Section 1g, H. 59-63. 
iii. (H. 137) Cf. Section 18, H. 83 fi. 
iv. (H. 138) Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysica A 2, 982 b 22 sgg. [comfort and recreation’— Ross]. 


492 Being and Time 


v. (H. 139) Cf. Pascal, Pensées, [ed. Brunschvicg, Paris, p. 185]. ‘Et de la vient qu'au lie, 
qu’en parlant des chases humaines on dit qu'il faut les connaitre avant que de les aimer, ce qui a 
passé en proverbe, las saints au contratre disent en parlant des choses divines qu'il faut les aimer 
pour ‘les connatire, et qu'on n'entre dans la vérité que par la charité, dont tls ont fait une de leurs 
plus utiles sentences.’ (‘And thence it comes about that in the case where we are speaking 
of human things, it is said to be necessary to know them before we love them, and this 
has become a proverb; but the saints, on the contrary, when they speak of divine things, 
say that we must love them before we know them, and that we enter into truth only 
by charity; they have made of this one of their most useful maxims’.—Tr.] Cf. with 
this, Augustine, Ofera, (Migne Patrologiae Latinae, tom. VIII), Contra Faustum, lib. 32, 
cap. 18: ‘non intratur in veritatem, nisi per charitatem.’ (‘one does not enter into truth except 
through charity’.—Tr.] 

vi. (H. 140) Cf. Aristotle, Rhetorica B 5, 1382 a 20-1383 b 11. 

vii. (H. 143) Cf. Section 18, H. 85 ff. 

vill. (H. 147) Cf. Section 4, H. 11 ff. 

ix. (H. 156) Cf. Section 13, H. 59 ff. 

x. (H. 166) On the doctrine of signification, cf. Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen, 
vol. II, Investigations I, IV-VI. See further the more radical version of the problematic 
in his Jdeen I, Sections 123 ff., pp. 255 ff. 

xi. (H. 171) Aristotle, Metaphysica A 1, 980 a 21. 

xii. (H. 171) Augustine, Confessiones, X, 35. 

xiii. (H. 175) Ct. Section 9, H. 42 ff. 


Division One, Chapter Six 

i. (H. 180) Cf. Section 12, H. 52 ff. 

ii. (H. 188) Cf. Section 12, H. 53 ff. 

iii. (H. 189) Cf. Section 27, H. 126 ff. 

iv. (H. 190) It is no accident that the phenomena of anxiety and fear, which have never 
been distinguished in a thoroughgoing manner, have come within the purview of 
Christian theology ontically and even (though within very narrow limits) ontologically. 
This has happened whenever tbe anthropological problem of man’s Being towards 
God has won priority and when questions have been formulated under the guidance 
of phenomena like faith, sin, love, and repentance. Cf. Augustine’s doctrine of the timor 
castus and servilis, which is discussed in his exegetical writings and his letters. On fear in 
general cf. his De diversis quaestionibus octoginta tribus, qu. 33 (de metu); qu. 34 (utrum non 
aliud amandum sit, quam metu carere); gu. 35 (quid amandum sit). (Migne, Patrologiae Latinas 
tom. VII, pp. 23 ff.) 

Luther has treated the problem of fear not only in the traditional context of an 
Interpretation of poenitentia and contritio, but also in his commentary on the Book of 
Genesis, where, though his treatment is by no means highly conceptualized, it is all the 
more impressive as edification. Cf. Enarrationes in genesin, cap. 3, Werke (Erlanger 
Ausgabe), Exegetica opera latina, tom. I, pp. 177 ff. | 

The man who has gone farthest in as the phenomenon ofanxiety— and again in 
the theological context of a ‘psychological’ exposition of the problem of original sin—is 
Seren Kierkegaard. Cf. Der Begriff der Angst [The Concept of Dread], 1844, Gesammelte 
Werke (Diederichs), vol. 5. 

v. (H. 197) The author ran across the following pre-ontological illustration of the 
existential-ontological Interpretation of Dasein as care in K. Burdach’s article. ‘Faust 
und die Sorge’ (Deutsche Vierteljahrschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Geistesgeschichte, 
vol. I, 1923, pp. ı ff.). Burdach has shown that the fable of Cura (which has come down 
to us as No. 220 of the Fables of Hyginus) was taken over from Herder by Goethe and 
worked up for the second part of his Faust. Cf. especially pp. 40 ff. The text given 
above is taken from F. Bücheler (Rhsinisches Museum, vol. 41, 1886, p. 5); the translation 
is from Burdach, żid., pp. 41 ff. 

vi. (H. 198) Of. Herder’s poem: ‘Das Kind der Sorge’ (Suphan XXIX, 75). 

vii. (H. 199) Burdach, op. cit., p. 49. Even as early as the Stoics, uépipva was a firmly 
established term, and it recurs in the New Testament, becoming “‘sollicitudo” in the 
Vulgate. The way in which ‘care’ is viewed in the foregoing existential analytic of 
Dasein, is one which has grown upon the author in connection with his atternpts to 
Interpret the Augustinian (i.e., Helleno-Christian) anthropology with regard to the 
foundational principles reached in the ontology of Aristotle. 


t. 


Being and Time 493 


viii. (H. 201) Cf. H. 89 ff. and H. 100. 
ix, (H. 203) Cf. Kant, Critigue of Pure Reasm,® pp. 274 ff., and further the corrections 
ded in the preface to the second edition, p. xxix, note: see also ‘On the Paralogisms 
of the Bure Reason’, ibid., pp. 399 ff., especially p. 412. 

x, (H. 20%) Ibid., Preface, note. 

xi. (H. 263) Ibid., p. 275. 

xii, (H. 203) Ibid., p. 275. 

xiii, (H. 204) Ibid., p. 275. 

xiv. (H. 205) Ibid,, Preface, note. 

xv. (H. 205) Cf. W. Dilthey, ‘Beiträge zur Lösung der Frage vom Ursprung unseres 
Glaubens an die Realität der Aussenwelt und seinem Recht’ (1890), Gesammelte 
Schriften, Vol. V, 1, pp. go ff. At the very beginning of this article Dilthey says in no 
uncertain terms: ‘For if there is to be a truth which is universally valid for man, then 
in accordance with the method first proposed by Descartes, thought must make its 
Mi gee the facts of consciousness rather than from external actuality.” (Jbid., p. go.) 

xvi. (H. 208) Following Scheler’s procedure, Nicolai Hartmann has recently based his 
ontologically oriented epistemology upon the thesis that knowing is a ‘relationship of 
Being’. Cf. his Grundzüge einer Metaphysik der Erkenntnis, second enlarged edition, 1925. 
Both Scheler and Hartmann, however, in spite of all the differences in the phenomeno- 
logical bases from which they start, fail to recognize that in its traditional basic orienta- 
tion as regards Dasein, ‘ontology’ has been a failure, and that the very ‘relationship of 
Being’ which knowing includrs (see above, H. 59 ff.), compels such ‘ontology’ to be 
revised in tts principles, not just critically corrected. Because Hartmann underestimates 
the unexpressed consequences of positing a relationship-of-Being without providing an 
ontological clarification for it, he is forced into a ‘critical realism’ which is at bottom 
quite foreign to the level of the problematic he has expounded. On Hartmann’s way of 
taking ontology, cf. his ‘Wie ist kritische Ontologie überhaupt möglich ?’, Festschrift 
für Paul Naterp, 1924, pp. 124 ff. 

xvii. (H. 209) Cf. especially Section 16, H. 72 ff. (“How the Worldly Character of the 
Environment Announces itself in Entities Within-the-world’); Section 18, H. 83 ff. 

‘Involvement and Significance; the Worldhood of the World’) ; Section 29, H. 134 ff. 
Dasein as State-of-Mind’). On the Being-in-itself of entities within-the-world, cf. H. 75f. 

xviii. (H. 209) Dilthey, op. cit., P. 134. 

xix. (H. 210) Cf. Scheler’s lecture, ‘Die Formen des Wissens und die Bildung’, 1925, notes 
ne 25. In reading our proofs we notice that in the collection of Scheler’s treatises 
which has just appeared (Die Wissensformen und die Gesellschaft, 1926) he has published 
his long-promised study ‘Erkenntnis und Arbeit’ (pp. 233 ff.). Division VI of this 
treatise (p. 455) brings a more detailed exposition of his ‘voluntative theory of Dasein’, 
in connection with an evaluation and critique of Dilthey. 

xx. (H. 212) Diels, Fragment 5. [This passage may be translated in more than one way: 
e.g., ‘for thought and being are the same thing’ (Fairbanks); ‘it is the sarme thing that 
can be thought and that can be’ (Burnet).—Tr.] 

xxi. (H. 212) Aristotle, Metaphysica A. 

xxii. (H. 213) Ibid., A, 984a 18 ff. [*. . . the very fact showed them the way and joined 
in forcing them to investigate the subject.’ (Ross)—Tr.] 

xxiii, (H. 213) Zbid., A, 986b 31. 

xxiv. (H. 213) bid., A, 984b 10. 

xxv. (H. 213) Ibid., A, 983b 2. Cf. 988a 20. 

xxvi. (H. 213) Zbid., al, 993b 17. 

xxvii. (H. 213) Ibid., al, 993b 20. 

xxviii. (H. 213) bid., F 1, 1003a 21. 

xix. (H. 214) Aristotle, De interpretatione 1, 16a. 6. [This is not an exact quot4tion.—Tr.] 

xxx. (H. 214) Cf. Thomas Aquinas, Quaestiones disputatae de veritate, qu. 1, art. 1. 

xai. (H. 215) Kant, Critique of Pure Reason,? p. 82. 

xxii. (H. 215) Zbid., p. 83. [Two trivial misprints in this quotation which anvear in the 
earlier editions have been corrected in the later editions.—Tr.] 

xiii. (H. 215) J/did., p. 350. [Another trivial misprint has been correctec in. the later 
editions.—Tr. } 

xxxiv. (H. 218) On the idea of demonstration as ‘identification’ cf. Huss:ri, Logische 
Untersuchungen,® vol. II, part 2, Untersuchung VI. On ‘evidence and truth’ see ibid., 
Sections 36-39, pp. 115 ff. The usual presentations of the phenomenological theory 


494 Being and Time 


of truth confine themselves to what has been said in the critica >rolegomena (vol. l, 
and mention that this is connected with Bolzano’s theory of the proposition. But the 
positive phenomenological Interpretations, which differ basically from Bolzano’s theory, 
have been neglected. The only person who has taken up these investigations positively 
from outside the main stream of phenomenoiogical research, has been E. Lask, whose 
Logik der Philosophie (1911) was as strongly influenced by the sixth Untersuchung (Über 
sinnliche und kategoriale Anschauungen’, pp. 128 ff.) as his Lehre vem Urteil (1912) 
was influenced by the above-mentioned sections on evidence and truth. 

xxxv. (H. 219) Cf. Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, Heracleitus fragment B r. 

xxxvi. (H. 220) Cf. H. 32 fi. 

xxxvii, (H. 221) Cf. H. 134 ff. 

xxxviii. (H. 221) Cf. H. 166 ff. 

xxxix. (H. 223) Karl Reinhardt (Cf. his Parmenides und die Geschichte der grieschischen 
Philosophie, 1916) was the first to conceptualize and solve the hackneyed problem of 
how the two parts of Parmenides’ pcen are connected, though he did not explicitly 
point out the ontological foundation for the connection between uAndeıa and Ödofa, 
or its necessity. 

xl. (H. 223) Cf. Section 33 above, H. 153 ff. (‘Assertion as a derivative mode of inter- 
pretation.’) 

xli. (H. 223) Cf. Section 34, H. 160 F. 

xlii. (H. 225) Cf. Aristotle, Ethica Nicomachea Z and Meiaphysica @ 10. 


Division Two, Section 45 

i. (H. 231) Cf. section 9, H. 41 fl. 

u. (H. 231) Cf Section 6, H. 19 ff.; Section 21, H. 95 ff. ; Secticn 43. H. 291. 

in. (H, 292) Cf, Section 32, A. 148 f. 

iv. (H. 232) Cf. Section 9, H. 41 fl. 

v. (H. 233) Cf. Sectien 41, H. ig: f. 

vi. (H. 235) In the nireteenth century, Søren Kierkegaard explicitly rized upon the 
problem of cxistence as an existenticil prcbiern, and thought it tirough in a penetrating 
fashior.. But the existential problemaitc was so alien to him that, as regar<!s his ontology, 
he remained completely dominated by Hegel and by ancient prilcsupav as Hegel saw 
itl Thus, there ix more to be learned philosophically from his ‘:ditying’ writings than 
from his theore:ical oues—with the exception of his treatise on he concept of anxiety. 
[Here Heidesscr is referring to the work gerierally known in 3ngiLb as Lhe Concept 
of Dread.—Tr.] 

Division Two, Chapter One 

i. (H. 240) Cf. Section 9, H. 41 fl. 

li. (H. 241) Cf. Section-10, H. 45 fi. 

wi. (H. 244; Toe dictinction between a whole and a sum, ddov and ancy, totum and 
compositum. has veen familiar since the ume of Plato and Aristot e. Bat sdinittediy no 
one as yet kacws anything about the systemaiics of the categorial variations which this 
division «ready embraces, nor have these been conceptualized. As an approach to a 
thoroug!: analvsis of the structures in question, cf. Edmund Hi sserl, Logische Unier- 
suchungen, vol. II, Catersuchung III: ‘Zur Lehre von den Ganzen t ad T-ılen’. | 

iv. (H. 245) Der siskermann aus Böhmen, edited by A. Berntand K. Bur iava (her Mittelalter 
zur Reformation. ur: nungen zur Geschichte der deulschen Bildung, ed teu =v a. Burdach, 
voi. III, 2. 7°) :917, chapter 20, p. 46. 

v. (H. 24%) On th’ rcp.c, cf. the comprehensive presentation im Bi rerneit"” Lebensdauer, 
Alten und Tod,  : Edition, 1924. Note especialiy the full bibiiogré phy, pp. 414 f. 

vi. (H. 249) In us Interpretation of ‘life’, the anthropology worked out in Christian 
theolog--—from Paul right un to Calvin's meditatio futurae vitae—has always kept death 
in wcw, Wilhelra Dilthey, whose real philosophical tendencies were aimed at an 
ontology of ‘ute’, could not fail te recopitize how life is connected «ith death: ‘^... and 
finelly, that relationship whica mest deeply and universally deter nines the fecling of 
our Dasein—ine relationskip of lje to de; for the bounding ıf sur existence Ly 
death is always decisive for oür understanding and assessment of lie. ‘Das Erlebnis und 
dis Dichtung, 5th Edition, p. 230.) Recently, G. Simmel has also explicitly included the 
1 Here we follow the older editions in reading ‘. . . und der durch diesen gesehenen 

antiken Philosophie ...’ In the new editions ‘gesehenen’ has been changed to ‘ges- 

chebenen’. 


Being and Time 495 


phenomenon of death in his characterization of ‘life’, though admittedly without clearly 
separating the biological-ontical and the ontological-existential problematics. (Cf. his 
Lebensanschauung: Vier Metaphysische Kapilel, 1918, pp. 99-159.) For the investigation 
which lies before us, compare especially Karl jaspers’ Psychologie der Weltanschauungen, 
grd Edition, 1925, pp. 229 ÍF., especially pp. 259-270. Jaspers takes as his clue to death 
the phenomenon of the “lırnit-situation’ as he has set it forth—a phenomenon whose 
fundamental significance gces beyond any typology of ‘atutudes’ and ‘world-pictures’. 
Dilthey’s challenges have been taken up by Rudolf Unger in his Herder, Novalis und 

Kleist. Studien uber die Entwicklung des Todesproblems tm Denken und Dichten von Sturm und 
Drang zur Romantik, 1922. In his lecture ‘Literaturgeschichte als Problemgeschichte. 
Zur Frage geisteshistcrischer Synthese, mit besonderer Beziehung auf Wilhelm Dilthey’ 
(Schriften der Königsberger \:zlenrten Gesellschaft, Geisteswissenschaftliche Klasse, 1. Jahr, Heft 1, 
1924), Unger considers the principles of Dilthcy’s way of formulating the question. He 
sces clearly the significance of phenemenclogical research for laying the foundations of 
the ‘problems of life’ in a more radical manner. (Op. cit., pp. 17 fl.) 

vit. (R. 249) CA Section 41, H. tye. 

vill. (H. 251) Cf. Section 40, H. 184 F. 

ix. (H. 252) Cf. Section 27, H. 126 ff. 

x. (H. 253) Cf. Section 16, H. 72 ff. 

xi. (H. 253) CH. Section 38, H. 177 T 

xii. (H. 254) In his story “The Dee. of Ivan Uvitch” Leo Tolstoi has presented the 
phenomenon of the diseapucn ard ureakdows Gi having ‘someone die’. 

xi. JH. 255) In couneruon with this metkodeiogical possibilicy, cf. what was said,on the 
analysis of anxiety, Section po, H. r4. 

xiv. (BH. 256) CF Section 44. P. nia f., especially H. 219 Al. 

xv. (H. 257) OF. Section 44 6 FE 222. 

xvi, (HX, 259: The inauthenucit, of Dasein has bern Randled im Section g (H. 42 ff), 
Secrion 27 (A. 130), and especially Section 35 (H. 175 FR). 

xvii, (H. 262) Cr. Section 31, TI. 142 fl. 

xvii EE cos) Gi. Section 62, 11. 305 ft. 

xix. H. 265} Cr Section 29, E r54 if 

xx, Ud. 266) Ch Secdos 40, H. ıda ©. 


irrin Tix, bach: Ties 

Gr au Secuen 25, ab. 12, 0% 

ii (kL 27) ab. Section 27, ad. cub ih esneralty IL. iss. 

iii. (i. 0B) “Lhese observauen: and these enich follow after were communicated ce 
theses on the cccasion of a philic lecture oc dae concept of tzae, which was given a: 
Marla. g in July 1924. 

iv, (li. 270) Cf. Section 23 fF., H. rgo © 

v, (H. 271) Cf. Section 34, H. 160 f. 

vi. (il. 2725 Besides use interpretations of cou «sace which we ind in Kant, Hegei. 
Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche, cne should notice M. Kahler’s Das Gewissen, ersier 
geschwhtlicher Teil (1878) and his article in tne Aeslenzyklopäadie far Protestantische The- 
ologie und Kirche. See too A. Ritschl’s ‘Uber Jas Gewissen’ (1876), reprinted in his 
Gesammelte Aufsätze, Neue Folge (1896), pp. 177 fi. See finaliy H. G. Stoker’s monograph, 
Das Gewissen, which has recently appeared in Schriften zur Philesophie und Soziologie, 
vol. {I (1925), under the editorship of Max Scheier. This is a wide-ranging investiga- 
ion; it brings to light a rich multiplieity of conscience-phenomena, characterize 
critically the different possible ways of treating this phenomenon itself, and lists some 
further literature, though as regards the history of the concept of conscience, this list 

is not complete. Stoker's monograph differs from the existential Interpretation we have 

given above in its approach and accordingly in its results as well, regardless of ma:ıy 
points of agreement. Stoker underestimates from the outset the hermeneutical con- 
ditions for a ‘description’ of ‘conscience as sornething which subsists Objectively and 
actually’ (p. 3). This leads to blurring the boundaries between phenomenology and 
theology, with damage to both. As regards the anthropological foundation of this 

investigation, in which the personalism of Scheler has been taken over, cf. Section 10 

of the present treatise, H. 47 ff. All the same, Stoker’s monograph signifies notabiie 

progress as compared with previous Interpretations of conscience, though more by its 


496 Being and Time 


comprehensive treatment of the conscience-phenomena and their ramifications than by 
exhibiting the ontological roots of the phenomenon itself. 

vii. (H. 277) Cf. Section 40, H. 189. 

viii. (H. 291) Cf. Max Scheler, Der Formalismus in der Ethik und die materiale Wertethik, Part 
‘lwo, Jahrbuch für philosophie und phänomologische Forschung, vol. II (1916), p. 192. 
[This passage is found on page 335 of the fourth edition, Francke Verlag, Bern, 1954 

T 


—Tr. 

ix. (H. 296) Cf. Section 34, H. 164. 

x. (H. 297) Cf. Section 44, H. 212 ff. 

xi. (H. 297) Cf. ibid., H. 221. 

xii. (H. 297) Cf. Section 18, H. 83 ff. 

xiii. (H. 298) Cf. Section 44b, H. 222. 

xiv. (H. 299) Cf. Sections 23 and 24, H. 104 f. 

xv. (H. 301) In the direction of such a problematic, san apn is the first to have 
explicitly grasped the task of a doctrine of world-views and carried it through. Cf. his 
Psychologie der Weltanschauungen, 3rd edition, 1925. Here the question of ‘what man is’ is 
raised and answered in terms of what he sentially can be. (Cf, the foreword to the first 
edition.) The basic existential-ontological signification of ‘liniit-situatiora’ is thus 
illumined. One would entirely miss the philosophical import of this ‘psychology of 
world-views’ if one were to ‘use’ it simply as a reference-work for ‘types of world-view’. 


Pay 


Division Two, Chapter Three 

i. (H. 302) Cf. Section 58, H. 280 ff. [This reference, which appears in both earlier and 
later editions seems to be incorrect. Cf. Section 53, H. 260 aTr] | 

i. (H. 306) The Being-guilty which belongs primordially to Dasein’s state of Being, must 
be distinguished from the status corruptionis as understood in theology. Bry can 
find in Being-guilty, as existentially defined, an ontological ċondition for the factical 
PS of such a status. The guilt which is ineluded in the idea of this status, is 
a factical indebtedness of an utterly peculiar kind. It has its own attestation, which 
remains closed off in principle from any philosophical experience. The existential 
analysis of Being-guilty, proves nothing either for or against the possibility of sin. Taken 
strictly, it cannot even be said that the ontology of Dasein of itself leaves this possibility 
open; for this ontology, as a philosophical inquiry, ‘knows’ in principle nothing about 


sin. 

iii. (H. 309) Cf. Section 45, H. 231 ff. 

iv. (H. gro) Cf. Section 45, H. 232. 

v. (H. 311) Cf. Section 5, H. 15. 

vi. (H. 314) Cf. Section 43, H. 200 ff. 

vil. (H. 914) Cf. H. 212 and H. 117. 

viii. (H. 314) Cf. Section 32, H. 152 ff. 

ix, Le 316) Cf. Section 445, H. 219 fl. 

x. (H. 317) Cf. Section 41, H. 191 fl. 

xi. (H. 317) Cf. Section 45, H. 231 ff. 

xii. (H. gı8) Cf. Section 25, H. 114 ff. 

xiii. (H. 318) Cf. Section 43c, H. 211. 

xiv. (H. 318) Cf. Section 4:, H. 193. 

xv. (H. 318) Cf. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, second edition, p. 399; and especially the 
treatment in the first edition, pp. 348 ff. 

xvi. (H. 319) On the analysis of transcendental apperception, one may now consult 
Martin Heidegger, Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik (zweite unveränderte Auflage, 
1951), Division III. [This note replaces the following note in the earlier editions, 
referring to a portion of Being and Time which has never appeared: “The first division of 
the second part of this treatise will bring the concrete Pa nonn ee analysis 
of transcendental apperception and its ontological signification.’—Tr.] 

xvii. (H. 319) Kant, op. cit., second edition, p. 404. 

xviii. (H. 319) Kant, op. cit., first edition p. 354» 

xix. (H. 020 The fact that in taking the ontological character of the personal Self as 
something ‘substantial’, Kant has still kept basically within the horizon of the mappro- 
priate ontology of what is present-at-hand within-the-world, becomes plain from the 
material which H. Heimsoeth has worked over in his essay ‘Persdnlichkeitsbewussisein 
und Ding an sich in der Kantischen Philosophie’ (reprinted from Immanuel Kant. 


(mae 
$ 


Being and Time 497 


Festschrift zur zweiten Jahrhundertfeier seines Geburtstages, 1924). The line taken in the essay 
goes beyond giving a mere historiological report, and 1s aimed towards the ‘cate- 
gorial’ problem of personality. 

Heimsoeth says: “Too little note has been taken of the intimate way in which the 
theoretical and the practical reason are worked into one another in Kant’s practice and 
planning; too little heed has been given to the fact that even here the categories (as 
opposed to the way in which they are filled in naturalistically in the ‘principles’) 
explicitly retain their validity and, under the primacy of the practical reason, are to 
find a new application detached fiom naturalistic rationalism (substance, for instance, 
in the ‘person’ and personal immortality; causality as the ‘causality of freedom’; and 
reciprocity in the ‘community of rational creatures’; and so forth). They serve as 
intellectual fixatives for a new way of access to the unconditioned, without seeking to 
give any ratiocinative knowledge of it as an object.’ (pp. 31 f.) 

But here the real ontological problem has been passed over. We cannot leave aside the 
question of whether these ‘categories’ can retain their primordial validity and only 
need to be applied in another way, or whether they do not rather pervert the ontological 
po of Dasein from the ground up. Even if the theoretical reason has been 

uilt into the practical, the existential-ontological problem of the Self remains not 
merely unsolved; it has not even been ratsed. On what ontological basis is the ‘working 
into one another’ of the theoretical and the practical reason to be performed? Is it 
theoretical or practical behaviour that determines the kind of Being of a person, cr 
neither of them—-and if neither, then what is it? In spite of their fundamental signifi- 
cance, do not the Bea make manifest how ontologically groundless are the 
problematics of the Self from Descartes’ res cogitans right up to Hegel’s concept of spirit ? 
One does not need to think either ‘naturalistically’ or ‘rationalistically’, and yet one 
may be under the domination of the ontology of the ‘substantial’—a domination which 
is only more baleful because it is seemingly self-evident. 

See what is essentially a supplement to the above-mentioned essay: Heimsoeth, ‘Die 
metaphysischen Motive in der Ausbildung des Kritischen Idealismus’, Kantstudien, 
XXIX, (1924), pp. 12: ff. For a critique of kants conception of the “‘I’’, see also Max 
Scheler, Der Formalismus in der Ethik und die materiale Wertethik, Part Two, in this Yearbook 
[Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung] vol. II, 1916, pp. 246 ff. (‘Person 
und das “Ich” der transzendentalen Apperzeption’). [This section is to be found on 
pp. 384 ff. of the fourth edition of Scheler’s work, Bern, 1954. Tr.] 

. (H. 321) Cf. our Sn critique of Kant’s ‘Refutation of Idealism’. 
Section 43a, H. 202 ff. 


xxi. (H. 321) Cf. Sections 12 and 13, H. 52 fl. 
xxii, (H. 324) Cf. Section 32, H. 148 fi., especially H. 151 f. 
xiii. (H. en Cf. Section 41, H. 196. 


Cf. Section 9, H. 43. 


xxiv. (E. 332 
xxv. (H. 332) Cf. Sections 25 ff., H. 173 f. 


i, 
ii. 


u 


Division Two, Chapter Four 
(H. 334) Cf. Division One, H. 41-230. 
(H. 336) Cf. Section 31, H. 142 fI. 
. (H. 338) 5. Kierkegaard is probably the one who has seen the existentiell phenomenon 
of the moment of vision with ihe most penetration; but this does not signify that he has 
been correspondingly successful in Interpreting it existentially. He clings to the ordinary 
conception of time, and defines the “moment of vision” with the help of “now” and 
“eternity”. When Kierkegaard speaks of ‘temporality’, what he has in mind is man’s 
‘Being-in-time’ [*In-der-Zeit-sein’’]. Time as within-time-ness knows only the “now”; 
it never knows a moment of vision. If, however, such a moment gets experienced in an 
existentiell manner, then a more primordial temporajity has been presupposed, al- 
though existentially it has not been made explicit. On the ‘moment of vision’, cf. 
K. are Psychologie der Weltanschauungen, third unaltered edition, 1925, pp. 108 ff., 
and further his ‘review of Kierkegzard’ (tbid., pp. 419-432). 


iv, (H. 339) Cf. Section 29, H. 134 ff. 


YV, 


{H. 941) Cf. Section 30, H. 140 ff. 


vi. (H. 342) Cf. Aristotle, Rhetorica B 5, 13822 21. 
vii. (H. 342) Cf. Section 40, H. 184 fl. 
viii, (H. 346) Cf. Section 38, H. 175 ff. 


498 Being and Time 


ic (A 346) Cf. Sections 35 ff., H. 167 ff. 

x. (Gi. 346) Cf Section 36, H. 170 ff. 

a. (H. 349) Cf. Section 34, H. 160 ff. 

ui. (Hl. 349) Cf., among others, Jakob Wackernagel, Vorlesungen über Syntax, vol. I, 1920, 
V ig, and especially pp. 149-210. See further G. Herbig, ‘Aktionsart und Zeitstufe’ in 
ÜwWog-rmanische Forschung, vol. VI, 1896, pp. 167 fl. 

xii. (F1. 349) Cf. Division Three, Chapter II of this treatise. [Since Division Three has 
never been published, this footnote has been deleted in the later editions.— Tr. ] 

247. (H. 350) Cf. Section 28, H. 193. . 

av, ‘H. 952) Cf. Section 15, H. 66 ff. 

«vi. (11. 952) Cf. Section 12, H. 56 ff. 

xvi, (H. 353) Cf. Section 18, H. 89 ff. 

‚sit. (H. 354) Cf. Section 16, H. 72 ff. 

xix. CH, 357) Cf. Section 44, H. 212 fl. 

«x. (H. 357) Cf. Section 7, H. 27 ff. 

xxi. CH. 358) Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, second edition p. 33. 

anti. (H. 360) Cf. Section 32, H. 151. 

„ai (A. 363) The thesis that all cognition has ‘intuition’ as its goal, has the temporal 
meaning ihar all cognizing is making present. Whether every science, or even philo- 
sophical cognition, aims at a making-present, need not be decided here. 

Husserl uses the expression ‘make present’ in characterizing sensory perception. Cf. 
his Logische Untersuchungen, first edition, 1901, vol. II, pp. 588 and 620. Tius ‘temporal’ 
way of describing this phenomenon must have been suggested by the analysis of 
perception and intuition in general in terms of the idea of intention. That the intention- 
ality of ‘consciousness’ is grounded in [Italics in newer editions omy.-—Tr.} the ecstatical 
unity of Dasein, and how this is the case, will be shown in the following Division. [This 
Division has never been published.—Ty.} 

nav. (M. 364) Cf. Section 18, H. 87 ff. 

vr, (H. 257) Cf Sections 22-24, H. rc: f. 

zwi. (£7. 370) Cf. Section 9, H. 42 ff. 


Division Two, Chapter Five 
i (H. 375) UF. Section G4, H. 316 F. 
ii. 228. 373° Ch Secuon 63, H. 310 R. 
ni (HM. 377) Gh Secuon de, H. 411 Œ 


wi. UH. 284) CE Section 26, H. 117 S.- 

wii, (££. a35) On the concept of the ‘generation’, cf Wilhelm Dilthey, ‘Ober das Studium 
ger Geschichte der Wissenschatten vom Menschen, der Geseilschaft und dem Staat’ 
Nge, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. V 11924), pp. 36-41. 

ict. 388) On the question of how ‘natural happening’ is to be distinguished onto- 

togicaily from the movement of history, cf. the studies of F. Gottl, which for a long time 
have not been sufficiently appreciated: Die Grenzen der Geschichte (1904). 

x. (H. 392) Cf. Section 6, H. 1g ff. 

x2, CH. 394) On the Constitution of histeriological understanding, cf. Eduard Spranger, 
‘Zur Theorie des Verstebens und zur geisteswissenschaitlichen Psychologie’, Festschrift 
fur Johannes Votkeli, 1918, pp. 257 if. 

xii, CH. 397) Ch. Briefwechsel zwischen Wilhelm Dilthey und dem Grafen Paul Yorck von Werter- 
burg 1877-1897, Halle-an-der-Saale, 1923. 

xiii. (H. 398) Briefwechsel,~c. 185. 

«iv. (H. 399) We can forgo this all the more because we are indebted to G. Misch for a 
roncrete presentation of Dilthey which i: aimed at his centrai tendencies, and which 
33 indispensable for coming to terms with Dilthey's work. Cf. his introduction to Wilhelm 
Dilthey, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. V (1924), pp. vii-cxvil. 

xv. (H. 403) Cf. Sections 5 and 6, H. 15 Fr. 


Division Two, Chapter Six 


i. (H. 408) Cf. Section 33, H. 154 ff. 
li. (H. 413) Cf. Section 15, H. 66 ff. 


Being and Time 499 


iii. (H. 414) Cf. Section 18, H. 83 ff., anc Secticn 69¢, H. 364 ff. 

iv. (H. 417) Here we shall not go into the problem cf the measurement of time as treated in 
the theory of relativity. If the ontologica! {evudations of such measurement are ta be 
clarified, this presupposes that world-time and within-time-ness have already been 
clarified in terms of Dasein’s temporality, and that light has also been cast on the 
existential-temporal Constitution of the discovery of Nature and the tempcral insaning 
of measurement. Any axiomatic for the physica) technique of measurement must rest 
upon such investigations, and can never, inı its own part, tackle the problem of time 
as such. 

v. (H. 418) As a first attempt at the Interpretation of chronclogical time ar. ! *h’storical 
numeration’ [““Geschichtszahl”’}, cf. rhe author’s habilitatics:-lecture at Freiburg in the 
summer semester of 1915: ‘Der Zeitbegrif in der Geschichtswissenschait’ {published in 
Zeitschrift für Phiiosophie und Philosophische Xv.ttk, vol. (61, 1916, pp. 173 IE.) Vac con- 
nections between historical numeration, werld-time as calculated astronorzical!‘-, and 
the temporality and historicality of Dasein need a more extensive investigaticn. 

Cf. further G. Simmel, ‘Das Problem der historischer Zeit’ in Philosophische Vorträge, 
veröffentlicht von der Kantgesellschaft, No. 12, 1916. Phe two works which laid the basis for 
the development of historiological chronology are Josephus Justus Scaliger, De emend- 
atione temporum (1583) and Dionysius Petavias, 5. J., Opus de doctrina temporun: 11627), 

On time-reckoning in antiquity cf. G. Bilfinger, Die antiken Stundenaneaber (1848) and 
Der bürgerliche Tag. Untersuchungen uber den Beginn des Kalendertages im klassischer. Altertum 
und in der christlichen Mittelalter (1988). See also H. Diels, Antike Technik, second edition, 
1920, pp. 155-232: ‘Die antike Uhr’. Mere recent chronology is handled by Fr. 
Ruhl in his Chronologie des Mittelalters und wo Neuzeit (i807). 

vi. (H. 420) Cf. Section 4c, H. 726 f. 

vi. (H. 421) Cf Aristotle, Physica A 11, 219b 1 ti. 

vill. (H. 421) Cf. Section 6, H. 19-27. 

ix. (H. 423) Cf. Section 21, especially H. 100 f. 

x. (EF. 424) Cf. Piaic, Toneeus 37 å. (But he deciivd te make a Klıdelr.orirp image of 
the eternal; and while setting the bewven in order, he piane an eterea nave, cy ae 
according to number—an image uf chat eie.nity whan noides in oneness Tt is to this 
image that we have given che name of "ne = “Ta, 

xi, (H. 224) CH. Section 4., H. ıg: F 

xit, (H. Aaa) CY. Section 5:. li. ae F. 

xiii (H. 427) The fact that tne cra uuo. occo ore ani Sende" as samui ing the 
"standing "now" ? inum. Mass! has bee hie. va cea: ardane way of us dtorstanding 
time and aas ten Sehne! wiih au ongein osan’: cce Puea KOSTETE presence- 
ai-hand, does not need i> be Gascussed bo date hola gtuni can be ‘construed’ 
philosophically, then at av pe uademtoud Luce 2s a More ırımerdiai temporality 
which is ‘infinite’, Wieber ibe way afede be tse aos regions ef eminentiag is a 
possible one, remains to be seen. 

xiv. (EJ. 427) Aristote, Mircea A 14. 293 a 25; Ch thiu., i.. 218 b ag-2ig asi, 219 a 4-6. 
j‘Burt if nothing other chan the soul in the soul’s muni were naw oliy equipped fer 
numoering, then af there were no soul, ume woud be impossible.’ ——~ ir. | 

xv. LH. 427} Augustine, Conjesstones AI, 20. [Hence it seemed to me that time is nothing 
else than an extendedness; but of what sort of thing it is an extendedness, I du not know; 
and it would be surprising if it were not an cxtendedness oF une soul itself.’---Tr.] 

xvi. (H. 427) On the other hand, the extent to which an even more radical understanding 
of ime chan Hegel’s makes its f evident in Kant, will be shown in the first division oi 
the second part of this treatise. [Tris portion of the work has not been published.—Tr.] 

xvii. (H. 428) Hegel, Die Vernunft i1 der Geschichte. Einleitung in dis I’hilosophie der Welt- 
geschichte (ed. G. Lasson, 1917}, P- 133. 

xviii. (H. 428) Hegel, loc. zit. [This phrase (das unsinnliche Sinntiche’) does not occur in 
this section of Hegei’s work as presented in Lasson’s 1920 edition, though we do find: 
‘Die Zeit ist dies ganz Abstrakte, Sinnliches.’ And in the addendum to Section 254 of 
Hegel’s Encyclopedia, which Heidczger cites in the following note, we read that space is 
‘eine unsinnliche Sinnlichkeit, und eine sinnliche Unsinnlichkeit'.—Tr.] 

xix. (H. 429) Cf. Hegel, Encyklopädir der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (ed. G. 
Bolland, Leiden, 1906), Sections 254 ff. This edition also incluces the ‘addenda’ from 
Hegel’s lectures. 

xx. (H. 429) Op. cit., Section 257, addendum. 


2) 


500 Being and Time 


xxi. (H. 429) Ibid., Section 254. [Here Heidegger has again somewhat rearranged Hegel’s 
rg —Tr.] 

i. (H. 429) Ibid., Section 254, addendum. [The passage reads as follows: ‘Space is thus 
™ punctuality, but a punctuality which is aulil—eomplete Continuity.’—Tr. 

xxiii. (H. 430) Cf. Hegel, Encyklopädie, Hoffmeister’s critical edition, 1949, Section 257. 
[In the later editions Heidegger quotes ‘this passage as follows: ‘Die Negativitat, die 
sich als Punkt auf den Raum bezieht wng in ihm ihre Bestimmungen als Linie und 
Fläche entwickelt, ist aber in der Sphäre des Aussersichseins ebensowohl für sich und 
ihre Bestimmungen darin, aber zugleick als in der Sphäre des Aussersichseins setzend, 
dabei als gleichgültig gegen das ruhige Nebeneinander erscheinend. So für sich gesetzt, 
ist sie die Zeit.’ This version differs somewhat from that given in the earlier editions of 
Heidegger’s work, in which this footnote: does not include the reference to Hoflmeister’s 
edition of the Encyclopedia. Neither versien entirely matches those found in the earlier 
editions of Hegel, and similar discrepantics : are found in Heidegger’s other quotations 
a the Encyclopedia.—Tr.] 

en 430) Ibid., Section 258. 

N (H. 431) Gf. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Lagi, Book I, Division I, chapter ı (ed. G. Las- 
son, 1923), pp. 66 ff. 

xxvi. (H. 431) Cf. Hegel, Encyklopädie, Session 258, addendum. 

xxvii. (H. 431) Ibid., Section 259. [' “Übrigens kommt es in der Natur, wo die Zeit Jetzt 
ist, nicht zum ‘bestehenden’ Unterschied vot j jenen Dimensionen” (Vergangenheit und 
Zukunft).’ The quotation appears ın less accurate form in the earlier 
editions of Heidegger’s work. —Tr.]. =... 

xxviii. (H. 431) Ibid., Section 259, addendum. 

xxix. (H. 431) bid., "Section 258, addendum. [The passage from Hegel reads as follows: 
‘Time is not, as it were, a receptacle in which everything has been put in a stream, and 
from which it gets swept away and soep? wider. Time is only this abstraction of such 
consuming.’—Tr. ] ae 

xxx. (H. 432-433) The priority which. Hegel Tai given to the “now” which has been 
levelled off, makes it plain that in defmmg the concept of time he is under the sway of 
the manner in which time is ordinarily windetstood; and this means that he is likewise 
under the sway of the traditional conception. of it. It can even be shown that his con- 
ception of time has been drawn directly from the ‘ hysics’ of Aristotle. 

In the Jena Logic (Cf. G. Lasson’s: rgag-cdltion), which was projected at the time of 
Hegel's habilitation, the analysis of ‘time which we find in his Encyclopedia has already 
been developed in all its essential parts. Even the roughest examination reveals that the 
section on time (pp. 202 ff.) is a paraphraie of Aristotle’s essay on time. In the Jena Logic 
Hegel has already developed his view gftimeywithin the framework of his Posch: yof 
Nature (p. 186), the first part of which is entitled ‘System of the Sun’ (p. 195) egel 
discusses the concept of time in conjunction with defining the concepts of aether and 
motion. Here too his analysis of space comes ater. Though the dialectic already emerges, 
it does not have as yet the rigid schematic farm which it will have afterward, but still 
makes it possible to understand the phenomitria in a fairly relaxed manner. On the way 
from Kant to Hegel’s developed system, the'impact of the Aristotelian ontology and 
logic has again been decisive. The Fact of this impact has long been well known. But 
the kind of effect it has had, the path it has taken, even its limitations, have hitherto 
been as obscure as the Fact itself has been familiar. A concrete philosophical Interpretation 
comparing Hegel’s Jena Logic with the ‘physics’ and ‘metaphysics’ of Aristotle will 
bring new light. For the above considerations, some rough suggestions will suffice. 

Aristotle sees the essence of time in the viv, Hegel in the “now”. Aristotle takes the 
vör as dpos; Hegel takes the “now” as a ‘boundary’. Aristotle understands the viv 
as orıyan; Hegel interprets the “now” as a point, Aristotle describes the viv as rdde Ti; 
Hegel calls the “now” the ‘absolute this’ Aristotle follows tradition in connecting 
xpovos with the adaipa; Hegei stresses the ‘circular course’ of time. To be sure, Hegel 
escapes the central tendency of the Aristotelian analysis-- the tendency to expose a 
eer connection (dxoAoufeiv) between the viv, the dpos, the otiypý, and the 
T Ti 

In its results, Bergson’s view is in accord with Hegel’s thesis that space ‘is’ time, in 
spite of the very different reasons they have given. Bergson merely says the reverse: that 
time (temps) is space. Bergson’s view of time too has obvéously arisen from an Inter- 
pretation of the Aristotelian essay on time. That & treatise of Bergson with the title 


Being and Time 501 
Quid Aristoteles de loco senserit should have appeared at the same time as his Essat sur les 
données immédiates de la conscience, where the problem of temps and durée is expounded, is 
not just a superficial literary connection. Having regard to Aristotle’s definition of 
time as the apıduos wıynaews, Be "pi his analysis of time with an analysis 
of number. Time as space (Cf. Essai, p. fg) is quantitative Succession. By a counter- 
orientation to this conception of time, dunetion gets described as qualitative Succession. 
This is not the place [Ort] for coming to terms critically with Bergson’s conception of 
time or with other Present-day views of it. So far as anything essential has been achieved 
in to-day’s analyses which will take us beyond Aristotle and Kant, it pertains more to 
the way time is grasped and to our ‘consciousness of time’. We shall come back to this 
in the first and third divisions of Part Two. [The preceding sentence has been deleted 
in the later editions.—Tr. ] ye 
In suggesting a direct connection between Hegel’s conception of time and Aristotle’s 


analysis, we are not accusing Hegel of any, ‘dependence’ on Aristotle, but are calling 
attention to the ontological import which thts Aliation has in principle for the Hegelian logic. 
On ‘Aristotle and Hegel’, cf. Nicolas $ aann’s paper with this title in Bettrage 


zur Philosophie des deutschen Idealismus, vol. 8, 1923, pp. 1-36. 

xxxi. (H. 433) Cf. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, vol. II (ed. Lasson, 1923)’ Part 2, p. 220. 

xxxii. (H. 434) Ibid. A a a > , 

xxxiii. (H. 434) Cf. Hegel, Die Vernunft in der Geschichte. Einleitung in die Philosophie der 
Weltgeschichte (ed. G. Lasson, 1917), p- 130. 

xxxiv. (H. 434) Ibid., p. 132. Pony 3 

xxxv. (H. i Ibid. pe ae, 

xxxvi. (H. 434) Ibid. i 

xxxvii. (H. 434) Cf. Hegel, Phänomenologie: des Geistes, Werke vol. II, p. 604. [In italicizing 

“the word ‘time’, we have followed sigan Ja earlier editions and the principal 
editions of Hegel’s works; these italics are not found in the later editions of Sein und Zeit. 
The italicization of ‘is’ has been intraduced by Heidegger, and does not appear in the 
edition of Hegel which he has apparently ised.—Tr.] 

xxxviii. (H. 434) Cf. Hegel, Die Vernunft m der Geschichte, p. 134. 

xxxix. (H. 435) Cf. Hegel, Encyklopddie, Sectión 258. 

xl. (H. 435) Cf. Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes, p. 605. 

xli. (H. +36) Cf. Section 7, H. 38. | 


NOTE ON THE INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


Being and Time is a work of many interwover ihernes, where words are vred io: 
strange ways made stranger still by the shift + “nother language. The reader must 
constantly remind himself of how specific expr-ssions are used, and he mus: recall 
the contexts in which they have appeared befire. In our index of Englis!: - <pres- 
sions we have tried to list most of those which. he may have occasion to loci up, 
indicating which German expressions they ho e been used to translate ard the 
chief passages in which they appear. We hav: also provided a German-Hnztish 
glossary for the benefit of the reader who needs a translation as an aid in studying 
the German text, or who has read other works of Heidegger or discussions of his 
theories and wants to know how we have hardicd specific problems. We have 
taken the reader irte our confidence, as it wert, exposing not only the pedantic 
consistency with which many expressions have been treated but also our many 
departures from consistency when a little more pedantry might have been 
warranted. 

Rather than overloading the index and giossary with trivial details, we have 
made no effort to list all the important expressions which belong to the same 
family, but have usually chosen one or two to serve as representatives for the rest. 
We have, however, used the expression ‘But cf.’ to introduce members of the family 
which have been handled in ways other than those which our main entry suggests; 
we have done so even in some cases where these exceptions are quite trivial. 

In both the index and the glossary we have usually tried to list all the ‘equiva- 
lents for expressions of each family for which an entry is made. In those cases 
where our list is incomplete, we have usually indicated this by an ‘efe.’; and we 
can assure the reader that most of the expressions covered by this abbreviation are 
of little philosophical importance. In the index, an asterisk (*) attached to a 
German expression means that to the best of our knowledge this expression has 
always been translated by some member of the family for which the entry is made. 
Similarly, in the glossary we have used asterisks to indicate those English ex oressions 
which (again to the best of our knowledge) have been used solely to translate the 
corresponding German expression and its cognates. When several ‘equivalents’ 
are listed, we have put the more frequent ones first. If a word not marked with an 
asterisk is given as an ‘equivalent’ for an expression listed in the glossary, but is not 
itself listed in the index (or vice versa), we have sometimes indicated in parentheses 
the other expressions to which it corresponds. 

When an English expression has been used to translate several German words 
of which only one or two are of philosophical interest, we have often con ‘ined our 
index references explicitly to these. When two or more English expressions have 
been used to translate the same German word, we have somctimes found it 
convenient to put all the references together under a single entry. See, for example, 
our entries for ‘assign’ and ‘refer’. 

In the index we have usually made no attempt to indicate all the passages in 
which an expression occurs. Indeed there are several exnressions of the utmost 
importance, occurring nearly on every page, for which we have been content to 


Wi 


504 Meme and Time 


list only a few key pos 223 or even none at all When, however, we have some 
reason to suppose that zur list is complete, we have indicated this with a dagger 
(t). In general, the fess te uuentiy a word appears, the Fuller our coverage. 

In both the index ana thc giossary we have wed the abbreviation "fin." to m- 
dicate the pages on whic: our relevant footnotes are to be found. Im the index we 
have sometimes used the ai-breviation “df? to designate the chief passages in which 
the author has discussed tl. meaning of an expression. if these do not coincide with 
those in which it first appears: we have done so even in some cases where the 
author would probably not fzei that he has given a fuli or official ‘definition’. 

The fullness and accuracy of both index and glossary are due in large measure 
to the extensive and careful records prepared by Miss Marjorie Ward, She is not 
responsible, however, for any errors we have made in supplementing her records 
or reducing them to a more compact form. 

All references are to the pagination of the later German editions as indicated in 
our margins. 


GLOSSARY OF GERMAN EXPRESSIONS 


a 


abblenden: *dim down 

Abgeschlossenheit: (See abschliessen.) 

Abgrund: *abyss 

(fin. H. 152) 
abkünftig: derivative 
(fin. H. 329) 
ableben: *demise 
(fin, H. 247) 
abschliessen, Abschluss: 
clude (H. 184, 259) 

Abstand: distance 

abstandmässig, Abständigkeit: 
tantial, *distantiality - 

Absturz: *downward plunge 

abtraglich: *detrimental 

Abwesenheit: absence 
Mangel, H. 9; etc.) 

Aktionsart: aspect 

alltäglich, Alltäglichkeit; 
*everyday, *everydayness 

But cf. alle Tage (every day, H. 370) 
( fin. H. 16) 

an; at; to; etc. 
(fin. H. 54) _ 

Analyse: analysis, analyse 

Analytik: *analytic 

der Andere: the Other, etc. 

Angabe, angeben: assign; tell (erzahien, 
Aufschluss geben, sagen, Anwei- 
sung, elc.); cite (anführen); ete. 

(fin. H. 408) 


*settle; con- 


*dis- 


(Fehlen; 


Alltag: 


Anganglichkeit, angehen: matter 
(verb); be feasible (*tunlich, H. 
337) 


angleichen: *lıken; *assirnilate 


(fin. HL 214) 


Angst: ue wee dread (H. 190 n. iv} 
f fin. A 2 a 
anhalten: (fi. 15335 persevens 
i PL, Er S- HY 
Bri of Anhalt (suppor', foothold); 


ansichhalten fhold itself in, 1. 
75, 80) 
(fin. H. 354) 
ankommen, ankünftig: *come along, 
*come on, *oncoming; etc. 
But cf. Ankunft (*arrıval, H. 250) 
Anruf, anrufen: appeal 


(fin. H. 269, 273) 


Ansatz, ansetzen: *approach; regard; 
start; posit; etc. 


anschauen. Anschauung: behold 
(schauen, H. 37, 169); intuit, 
intuition . 


(fin. H. 27, 402) 
anschneiden: *take the first cut 


(fin. H. 150) 
ansichhalten: hold itself in 
But cf. entry for ‘anhalten’ above. 
(fin. H. 75) 
An-sich-sein: Being:in-itaelf, ‘Being-in- 
themselves (An-ihm-selbst-sein, H. 
90) 
(fin. H. 75) - 
ansprechen: address; consider 
(fin. H. 37, 408) 
Anthropologie: *anthropology 
(fin. H. 17) 
anvisieren: *set our sights 
anweisen, angewiesen, Angewiesenheit: 
submit, submission; *enjoin, *in- 
junction; allot; assign; dependent 
(*abhängig; efc.); “instruct, *in- 
struction; tell (H. 19, 43, 115); 
provide (H. 19) 
(fin. H. 68, 87) 
anwesend: *having presence 
But cf. Anwesenheit (presence). 
(fin. H. 326) 
Anwesenheit: presence 
Bui cf. anwesend. (*having presence). 
(fin. H. 25, 226) 
anzeigen, Anzeige: indicate; call atter- 
tion 
fen, yF) 
apenhantisch: *aponhantical 


a TA gine ` = ’ ; 
oe Oe rn © LOTEA ia) z. TENSE EERTE SO 
fed Tlicliett 3 H 2 We ae 


bie rl. 04,308, 
aufdecken: uncover; expose {lreileger., 
H. 3753 sich aussetzen, H. 376) 
aufaringlich: *obtrusive 
(fin. H. 74) 
Aufenthalt: dwelling; sojourn (H. 24); 
*stop for a while H. 303) 
( fin. H. 61) 


506 


auffallig, auffallend: *conspicuous 
(fin. H. 74) 

aufgehen: “be absorbed; rise (H. 412) 
(fin. H. 

aufhalten: dwell; hold up (vorhalten, 

H. 266) 

(fin. H. 61, 354) 

"aufrufen, Aufruf: *summon 
(fin. H. 269, 273) 

Aufsassigkeit: *obstinacy 
(fin. H. 74) 

aufschliessen: *lay open 

But cf. Aufschluss (information; tell; 
etc.) 

(fin. H. 75) 

das “Auf-sich-zu” 
oneself” 

(fin. H. 329) 

sich aufspreizen: *give ea airs 

(fin. H. 430) o i 

aufweisen: exhibits poigt Sit: point to 
‘(fin H. 53) 
aufzeigen: point out; exhibit; point to” 
(H. 71); *point at (H. 215) 
Augenblick: moment; *moment of 

_ vision 

(fin. H. 328, 338) 

, ausdriicken, Ausdruck: express, ex- 
pression 

But cf. ausdrücklich (explicit; etc.) 

(fin. H. 149) 

ausdrücklich; explicit --- - 

But cf. unausdrücklich (tacit, un- 
expressed, not explicit, eic.) 

(Jim H 10) on 

auseinanderlegen: analyse; € apart 

(fin. H. 149) 

ausgleichen: balance off; *even out 
(H. 126) 

auslegen: *interpret; lay ‘out (H. 409) 

(fin. H. 1, 148, 149, 409) 

ausliefern: *surrender 

ausrichten, ausgerichtet: direct, *di- 
rectional, *directionality; contri- 
bute (H. 82) 

(fin. H. 102) 

(Note: while ‘Ausrichtung’ is translated 
as ‘directionality’, ‘Ausgerichtetheit’ 
ts translated as *‘directedness’.) 

. ausrücken: *back away 
(fin. H. 339) 
*ausrufen: p 
aussagen, Aussage: *assert, *assertion; 
*deposition (H. 197) 


*the ‘towards- 


Being and Time 


x 

But cf. Aussagesatz (statement); 
Heraussage (*speaking forth). 

(ftn. H. 62, 149) 

Aussein auf. : an out for .. ; 
“Being out to get... (H. 261) 
äusserlich: *superficial; external 

(fin. H. 339) 

das Ausser-sich: *the “outside-of-itself” 

Aussersichsein: *Being-outside-of-itself 

aussprechen: express; *speak out (H. 
168f) 

But cf. unausgesprochen (tacit; un- 
expressed); Ausspruch (pro- 
nouncement; .etc.); Aussprache 
(pronouncing; elc.). 

(fin. H. 149, 167, 224, 408) 

Ausstand, ausstehen: *outstanding; 
has yet to be given (H. 205, 230) 
(fin. H. 236, 250) 


‚ausweisen: demonstrate 
,. (fin. H. 53) 


bedeuten, Bedeutung, Bedeutsamkeit: 
u) signification, *significance 


(fin, H. 1, 87) 
(Note; ‘Bedeutsamkeit” has always been 
translated as ‘significance’, which, 


however, has also been used occasionally 
for ‘Bedeutung’.) 

bedrohen: threaten 

befinden, befindlich, Befindlichkeit: 
*state-of-mind; to be found; find 
But cf. Befund (findings; datum, 


H. 53; find) - | 

(fin. 134 1375 328) mae 

(Note: ‘Befindlichkett ‘hes always been 
translated as ‘state-of-mind’, which 


has also been used occasionally for 
‘Befinden’ and ‘befindlich’.) 


befragen: *interrogate 


befreieh: *liberate 


befürchten: *be apprehensive ` 

But cf. Furcht, fürchten (*fear) ; sich 
fürchten (*be afraid). : 

begegnen: *encounter 

(fin. H. 31, 44 329) 

(Note ; while ‘Begegnisart’ ts: translated 
as ‘way of encountering’ ; * Begegnis’ is 
translated as ‘mishap’ in H. 252.) 

begreifen, Begriff: Begrifflichkeit: *con- 
ceive, “concepf, “conception, 
*co tual; include; ete. 
But cf. Inbegriff (aggregate). i; 
(fin. H. 150, 433) . T 


Glossary of German Expressions go" 


behalten: retain, *retention, *reten- 
tive; keep (H. 132) 
But cf. Recht behalten (is right, is 
Justified); vorbehalten (reserve) 

(fin. H. 354) . _ 
bei: *alongside; in; in spite of; etc. 

(fin. H. 54, 84, 85, 141, 239, 329) 
belegen: reserve (H. 368), *pre-empt 

(H. 19); evidence (H. 431) 

(fin. H. 368) 
benommen: *fascinated 
But cf. benehmen 

deprive). 
(fin. H. 344) 
berechnen: calculate 
bereden: *talk about 
But cf. Rede (*discourse, talk) 
berufen: *invoke, appeal (H. 150) 
But cf. Beruf (*occupation). 
beruhigen: *tranquillize; tranquillity 
(Ruhe, H. 254, 430) 

berühren: touch 

besagen: mcan; say; amount to; be 
tantamount to 

(fin. H. 1) 
beschliessen: include; imply; embrace; 

comprise; make a decision (H. 299) 

( fin. H. 299. 300) 

innen: consider 

(fin. H. 15) 
besorgen: *concern; provide (H. 253); 

*make provision (H. 106) 
But cf. Besorgnis (*worry); Sorge 
(care) and its other compounds. 

(fin. H. 57) 
besprechen: discuss 

But cf. sprechen (speak, etc.) and its 

other compounds. 


(take away; 


(fin. H. 34) 

Bestand: content; *stock; subsistence; 
etc. 

But cf. Lehrbestand (*body of 
doctrine, H. 22); Tatbestand 


(*facts of the case; *how things 
stand, H. 242); Bestandstuck 
(*component); Bestandart (what 
... consists in); beständig (q.v.). 
(fin. H. 36, 303) 
beständig, Beständigkeit: steadiness; sta- 
bility (H. 417); permanent (H. 98) 
But cf. Bestand (gq. v.). 
bestehen: be; consist; subsist; remain; 
persist (H. 174); ek. 
(fin. H. 303) 


bestimmen: *determine, defrr, 
*make definite; “give a Geir. > 
character; characterize (*cha av- 
terisieren, tec; kennzeichn::;, 
attribute (*Attribut; zuspreche:r' 
ascertain (festlegen; fessteller, - 
*destine 

fin. H. 15, 344) 

(Note: this verb and its derivatives ar: . » 
no means technical terms for Heidegy: , 
but are ubiquitous in German phiio 
sophical writing. While we have 
found it impossible to adopt any 
standard polig for translating them, 
we have tried to use forms of ‘deter- 
mine’ or ‘define’ whenever we can do 
so without awkwardness.) 


bevorstehen, Bevorstand: *impend, 
*impendence; stand before; etc. 
(fin. H. 250) 


Bewandtnis: involveınent (bewenden) 


(fin. H. 84) 
bewegen: move; operate; etc. 
Bewegtheit: movement 
Bewegung: *motion; movement; ete. 


. bewenden: *involve, involvement (Be- 


wandtnis) 

( fin. H. 84) 

bezeugen: *attest 

But cf. Zeugnis (*testimony; docu- 
ment); Zeug (*equipment, etc.) 
and its compounds. 

beziehen, Beziehung, Bezogenheit, 
Bezug, bezüglich: relate, relation, 
relationship, relational, etc. 

(Note: ‘Bezug’ and ‘bezüglich’ have 
been translated very freely, but ‘un- 
bezüglich” is always translated as 
‘non-relational’,) 

Bild: picture; image (H. 397) 

(fin. H. 217) 

(Note: compounds such as ‘Gebild’, 
‘bilden’, etc. have been translated in 
other ways.) 

bin: *am 


(fin. H. 54) 


Charakter, Charakteristik, charakter- 
isieren: character, characterize, 
characteristic; factor (H. 5) 

(Note: while these words appear quite 
frequently, we have used their English 
cognates even more freely.) 


x 


508 


da: there; that; as; here (H. 
430 
(fin. H. 7, 135, 408) 
dabei: there alongside; thereby, etc. 
But cf. Mit-dabei-sein (Being “in on 
it” with someone). 
( fin. H. 85, 119, 239) 
dagewesen: *has-been-there 
damals: *on that former occasion 
But cf. damalig (of that time). 
dann: then; than; in that case; etc. 
(fin. H. 406) 
Dasein: *Dasein 
(fin. H. 7, 25, 41, 58, 63, 184) 
Da-sein: *Being-there 
(ftn. H. 7) 
daseinsmässig: *of the character of 
Dasein; *of the kind which be- 
longs to Dasein; *on the part of 
‚Dasein; Dasein’s; ete. 
(Note: see entry on ‘-mdssig’ below.) 
das Dass: *the “that-it-is” 
(fin. H. 135) 
das ‘Dass es ist”: *the ‘that it is’ 
(fin. H. 135) 
datieren: *date (verb) 
Dauer: *duration 
But cf. Lebensdauer (*longevity) ; 
Unsterblichkeitsdauer (*immor- 
tality); dauern (g.v.) 
dauern: *to last 
But cf. Dauer (g.v.) 
das Dazu; *the “towards-this” 
defizient: *deficient 
(fin. H. 20) 
determinieren: *Determine 
deuten: point to; explain 
But cf. andeuten (intimate; suggest; 
*hint); Ausdeutung (*exegesis) ; 
bedeuten (signify; ete.) 
(ftn. H. 87) 
dienen: serve; etc. 
(Jtn. H. 78) 
Diehlichkeit: *serviceability 
(fir. H. 78) 
Differenz, differenzieren: differentiate 
But cf. indifferent (*Indifferent, 
*undifferentiated; etc.) 
(fin. H. 429) 
Ding: *Thing 
But cf. verdinglichen (*reify) 
das Dort: *the “yonder” 
But cf. das Dorther (*the “thence”); 
das Dorthin (the ‘‘thither’’). 


102, 


Being and Time 


Drang: urge 
(Note: while “ urge’ has been reserved for 
‘Drang’ and for ‘drängen’ and some of 
its compounds, most of these have 
usually been translated in other ways.) 
drohen: threaten 
Durchschnitt, durchschnittlich: 
“average _ 
durchsichtig: *transparent 
But cf. undurchsichtig (*opaque). 
(Jin. H. 5) 


echt: genuine 
But cf. unecht (*bogus; not genuine). 
‚fin. H. 5) 
eigen; eigenst: own; *ownmost, *most 
its own 
But cf. eigentlich (q¢.v.); Eigenschaft 
.(q.v.); eignen (*have as its own; 
belong; ete.); geeignet (q.v.). 
(fin. H. 42) 
Eigenschaft: *property 
(fin. H. 83) 
eigentlich: *authentic; *real; properly 
(H. 171); ete. 
(Jin. H. 5, 42, 329) 
einebnen: *level down 


Ejinfihlung: *empathy 


einholen: catch up 
(Jin. H. 302) 
einmalig: once for all 
einnehmen: occupy; take in (H. 368f) 
(fin. H. 368) 
einräumen: *make room 
(fin. H. 111, 368) 
einschranken: confine; restrict 
_ (fin. H. 155) 
einspringen: *leap in; “intervene (H. 
100) 
(Jm. H. 100, 122) 
einwohnen 
(fin. H. 54) 
Ekstase, ekstatisch: *ecstasis, *ecstati- 
: cal. 
(fin. H., 329, 338) 
Ende: *end (noun) etc. 

But cf. enden (g.v.); endgültig 
(q.v.); endlich (¢.v.); unendlich 
(q.v.). 

(Note: ‘Ende’ is usually translated as 
‘end’ except in the expression ‘am 
Ende’, which is translated not only as 

Sin the end’ but also as ‘ultimately’, 
‘in the long run’, etc.) 


Glossary of German Expressions 


enden: end (verb) 

But cf. Beendigung (*termination) ; 
verenden (*perish) ; vollenden (ful- 
fil; complete) 

endgültig: final 
endlos: *endless 
entdecken: *discover; uncover 
(fin. H. 33, 218) 
entferden: *desever; *remove 
But cf. ent-fernen (q.v.). 
(fin. H. 103, 105) 
ent-fernen: *de-sever 
But cf. entfernen (g.v.) 
(fin. H. 105) 
entfremden: *alienare 
But cf. befremden (*seem strange). 
entgegenkommen: accommodate (H. 
127f); confront . . . as coming 
from (H. 337); come its way (H. 
384 
entgegenwärtigen: *deprive of its char- 
acter as present 
entgegenwerfen: *throw against 
(fin. H. 363) 
enthalten: *contain; 
back (*retardieren, H. 169) 

But cf. vorenthalten (*withhold, H. 

281) 


hold 


include; 


(fin. H. 61) 
enthüllen: *reveal; *unveil; patent 
(H. 141) 
entrücken, Entrückung: *carry away; 
*rapture; withdraw (H. 401, 
Yorck) 


(fin. H. 338, 339) 
entschliessen: *rescive 
(fin. H. 299, 300) 
Entschlossenheit: *resoluteness 
(fin. H. 297) 
Entschluss; *resolution 
entspringen: arise; *spring from; *leap 
away; source (H. 45, 70); ek. 
(fin. H. 347, 348) . 
entweltlichen: *deprive of its world- 
hood 
entwerfen, Entwurf: *project, *pro- 
jection 
(fin. H. 124, 145, 285, 315) 
Ereignis: event 
erfahren: *experience; undergo; eic. 
(fin. H. 46) 
erfassen: grasp: “get in one’s grasp; 
*apprehend; *comprehension (H. 
49) 


599 


erfüllen: *fill in; fulfill; complete 
(verb) 

But cf. Normerfüllung (*satisfying a 
norm) 

(fin. H. 151) 

ergreifen: *seize upon; *take hold of; 

_ grasp (H. 332, 384); etc. 

erinnern: *remember; *recall 

(fin. H. 339) 

erkennen, Erkenntnis: know, know- 
ledge; *cognize, *cognition ; recog- 
nize (anerkennen, *wi:dererken- 
nen, kennen, etc.) 

But cf. anerkennen (recognize; ac- 
ceptance, H. 32); Erkenntnis- 
theorie (*theory of knowledge: 
*epistemology). 

(fin. H. 36, 123, 124, 146) 

(Note: ‘verkennen’ and ‘verfehlen’ have 
both been translated as ‘fail to recog- 
nize’; ‘kenntlich’ as ‘recognizable’ and 
*‘unrecognizZable’.) 

erleben, Erlebnis: *Experience 
But cf. Er-leben (*living-through). 
(fin. H. 46) 
errechnen: compute 
(fin. H. 48) 
erscheinen, Erscheinung: *appear, 
*appearance; *apparition (H. 402, 
Yorck 

But cf. Krankheitserscheinung 
(*symptom of a disease). 

(tn. H. 29) l 

erschliessen: *disclose; infer (H. 318) 

(fin. H. 75, 151, 297, 298, 300, 


315 
erschrecken: *alarm 
erstrecken: “stretch along; 
(Strecke); extend 
erwarten: *expect 
erwidern: *rejoin, *rejoinder 
(fin. H. 386) 
das “es gibt’’: the ‘there is’ 
(fin. H. 212, 412) 
Essenz: * Essence 
(fin. H. 117) 
essentiell: * Essential 
(fin. H. 117) 
existent, Existenz, existieren: *existent, 
*existence, *exist 
But cf, Existenzverfassung (existential 
constitution, H. 43) 


(fin. 303) 
Existenzial (noun): *existentiale 


stretch 


510 


existenzial (adj.): *existential 
(fin. H. ı2) 

existenziell: *existentiell 
(fin. H. 12) 

explizit: explicit 
But cf. explizieren (explain). 
( fin. H. 149) 


faktisch: *factical 


(fin. H. 7, 56) 
Faktizität: *facticity 
(fin. H. 7, 56) 

Faktum: *Fact 

(fin. H. 56) 

fallen: fall; ete. 

(fin. H. 134, 428) 

(Note: in general verbs terminating in 
‘fallen have been translated by 
variants of ‘fall’. Exceptions: auffal- 
lend (conspicuous); ausfallen (drop 
out); beifallen (help) ; entfallen (drop 
out); überfallen (*assail); zerfallen 
(*disintegrate; collapse; etc.) ; zurück- 
Sallen (*fall back; *relapse) ; zusam- 
menfallen (coincide; collapse).) 

fern: far 


(fin. H. 105) 

(Note: while the adjective ‘fern’ and 
the derivative noun ‘Ferne’ have 
generally been translated by some 


form of ‘far’, this ts not usually 
the case with compounds based on this 
stem.) 

festhalten: *hold fast; adhere (*anhaf- 
ten); keep in mind; reserve; ete. 

(fin. H. 354) 

finden: find 
(fin. H. 135) 
fliehen, Flucht: flee (fliichtig) 
But cf. Zuflucht (*refuge; *resort to), 
(fin. H. 184) 
flüchtig: *fugitive; *fleeting; flee 
(*fliehen, *Flucht) 

But cf. verflüchtigen (*volatilize). 

fortlaufend : continuing 

(fin. H. 243) 

frei: free (adj. 

But cf. befreien (*liberate) ; freilegen 
(*lay bare; *expose to view, H. 
375); Freimut (*ingenuousness) ; 
freihalten (*hold free; *steer clear, 
H. 33; *keep open, H. 101; etc.) : 
freschwebend (g.v.); wahlfrei 
("options of choice). 


Being and Time 


frcizgegen, Freigabe: *free (verb) 
( fin. H. 83) 
freischwebend: *free-floating; soaring 
(*überfliegend, H. 310) 
Fundament: foundation (fundieren, 
*fundamentieren) 
But cf. fundamental (g.v.); funda- 
mentieren (q.V.). 
fundamental: *fundamental 
But cf. Fundament (g.v.); funda- 
mentieren (q.v.). 


fundamentieren: *lay the founda- 
tions 
But cf. Fundament (g.v.); funda- 
mental (q.v.). 


fundieren: *to found; foundation 
(*Fundament; *fundamentieren) 
(fin. H. 34, 59) 
für: for, ete. 
(fin. H. 84) 
Furcht, fürchten: fear (noun and verb) 
But. cf. befürchten (*be apprehen- 


sive) gich fürchten (g.v.). 
( fin. HM, 142) 
with für: *fear for... 
with um: *fear about... t 
with vor: fear in the face of... 
sich fürchten: *be afraid 
( fin. H. 142) 
furchtbar: *fearsome 
furchtsam: *fearful 
Fürsorge: *solicitude; *welfare work 
(H. 121) 
But cf. Sorge 
(*concern; etc.) 


(fin. A. 127) 


(*care); besorgen 


ganz: whole (Ganze), *wholly; com- 
pletely; quite; altogether; etc. 
But cf. Ganzheit (g.v.); ergänzen 
(*round out). 
Ganze: whole (ganz); totality (*Ganz- 
heit; Gesamtheit, H. 28; das All) 
~ (fin. H. 236) 
Gänze: *wholeness 
(fin. H. 236) 
Ganzheit: N (Ganze; das All; 
Gesamtheit, H. 28) 
But cf. ganz (q. 2.). 


(fin. H. 236) 
Ganzzein: *Being-a-whole 
Ganzseinkönnen: *notentiality-for- 


Being-a-whole 
geeignet: appropriate; suited 
(fin. H. 83) 


Glossary of German Expressions 51r 


das Gegen: *the “counter to” H. 210) 
(fin. H. 255) | 
(Note: while the prefix ‘Gegen-’ has 
often been translated by ‘counter’, this 
is not always the case; the preposition 
‘gegen’ ts usually translated in oiher: 
ways.) 
Gegend : *region 
But cf. Region (*realim). 
(fin, H. 109) 
Gegenstand: object 
But cf. Objekt (*Objert). 
Gegenwart: *Present; *Present-day 
(H. 432 n. xıx) 
But cf. gegenwärtig (q.v.); gegen- 
wärtigen, et. (q.V.). 
(fin. H. 25, 26, 326, 329, 338, 
347) 
gegenwärtig: *ın the present 
But cf. Gegenwart (g.v.). 
(fin. H. 326) 
gegenwärtigen: *make present 
But cf. Gegenwart (g.v.); entgegen- 
wärtigen (*deprive of its character 
as present); Nichtgegenwärtigen 
(*not-making-present); Ungegen- 
wärtigen (*making-unpresent) ; 
vergegenwartigen (*envisage). 
(fin. H. 326, 347, 359) 
Gehalt: content (*Inhalt; Bestand) 
gehören: belong; etc. 
But cf. sich gehören (*be fitting). 
(fin. H. 284) 
Geist, geistig: 
tellectual 
But cf. Geisteswissenschaft (q.v.). 
Geisteswissenschaft: *humane science 
But cf. Geist (q.v.). 
gelten, Geltung: valid, validity (gültig, 
Gültigkeit); be accepted ee 
be regarded as . . .; hold, etc. 
(fin. H. 155) 
genuin: genuine (echt) 
(fin. H 
Gerede: *idle talk 
But cf. das Geredete (*what is said 
in the talk). 
geschehen: *historize; happen 
(fin. H. 19, 371, 384) 
Geschichte, geschichtlich: *history, 
*historical; story (H. 6) 
But cf. Historie (*historiology, 
*History), etc. 
(fin. H. 10) 


spirit, *spiritual; in- 


Geschichtlichkeit: *historicality 
But cf. Historizitat (*historicity). 
Geschick: *destiny; *vicissitude 
(fin. H. 384) 
Gestalt: form; pattern; *shape; etc. 
gestimmt, Gestimmtheit, Gestimmt- 
sein: (See stimmen.) 
gewärtig, gewärtigen: await 
PR 337, 347) 
das Gewesen: *the “been” 
gewesen: having been, have been; etc. 


(fin. H. 326) 
gewesend: *in the process of having 
been 


(fin. H. 326) | 
Gewesenheit: having been; char- 
ete, 


acter of having been; 
(fin. H. 326, 328, 3929) * 
gewesen sein: *be as having been .. 
(fin. H. 326) 
gewiss: certain (bestimmt; etc.) 
But cf. Gewissen (g.0.). 
( fin. > 291) 
: ®conscience 
But f. gewiss (q.0.). 
(fin. H. 291) 
Gewissenhabenwollen: 
have a conscience 
Geworfenheit: *thrownness 
(fin. A. 135) 
Gier: *craving 
(fin. H. 346) 
gleichgültig: *indifferent \ 
But cf. indifferent (*Indifferent; 
*undifferentiated, cé.). 
(fin. H. 42, 255, 429) 
Gleichmut: *equanimity 
(fin. H..134) 
gleichursprünglich: *equiprimordial; 
*with equal primordiality 
gliedern: *articulate; divide 
But cf. zergliedern (*dissect); artiku- 
lieren (*Articulate). 
(fin. H. 153) 


*wanting to 


Grenzsituation: *limit-situation 
Grund, gründen: ground (Boden; et.) ; 


“base; basis (*Basıs; Boden, e&.); 
reason (Vernunft; et.); *bottom; 
ekc. 

(fin. H. 34, 152) 

(Note: most of the compounds in which 
the stem ‘grund-’ or the termination 
‘grund’ appears have been translated 
with the aid of either ‘base’, ‘basic’, 


512 


Grund— ont. 
or be Exceptions : ‘Ab 
ae 


er ‚grund- 


un pagrndalieger .) 
en *Being the basis, *Being a 
asis 
Grundverfassung: *basi¢ constitution, 
*basic state, *basically constituted 
gültig, Gültigkeit: valid, valid char- 
acter (gelten, Geltung) 
But cf. endgültig (finally, finality); 
gleichgültig (*indifferent). 
(fin. H. 155) 


halten: hold; maintain; etc. 
(fin. H. 75, 256, 347, 354) 
(Note: we no effort to translate 
‘halten’ and its numerous compounds 
in any systematic fashion.) 

zur Hand: *to hand 
But cf. zuhanden (*ready-to-hand). 

handeln: *take action; handle; act, 

action; be a matter of 

But cf. abhandeln, Abhandlung 
(treat, treatise); behandeln 
(treat, handle); verhandeln (dis- 
cuss; *plead one’s cause; ete.). 

(fin. H. 300) 

handlich: *handy; *manual (adj. H, 

109); manipulable 

But cf. unhandlich (*unmanageable, 
H. 355); leichthandlich (facile, 
H. 78) 

Hang: *addiction 

hantieren: manipulate 

heissen: mean; etc. 

(fin. H. 1) 

heilsichtig: *have clear vision 
(fin. H. 384) 

herannahen: *draw close 

hereinstehen: *enter into 

Hermeneutik, hermeneutisch: 

meneutic, *hermeneutical 
hervorbringen: bring forth 
(fin. H. 29) 

hinhören: *listen away 
(fin. H. 271) 

Historie: *historiology; *History 
But cf. Geschichte (*history; story) 
(fin. H. 10, 397) 

historisch: *historiological; * Historical 
But ee geschichtlich (*historical) 
(fin. H. 10, 397) 


*her- 


Being and Time 


Historizität: *historicity 
But cf. Geschichtlichkeit (*histori- 
cality) 
fin. H. 10, 20) 
horchen: *hearken 


hören: *hear; *listen 

(fin. H. 164, 271, 284). 

(Note: most compounds in which hören’ 
appears have been translated with 
variants of ‘hear’ and ‘listen’. But of. 
‘aufhören’ (‘stop’); ‘gehören’ (‘be 
long’) ; ‘unerhért? (‘unprecedented’).) 

hörig: *thrall to... 


But cf. zugehörig (belonging); 
Gehörigkeit (*belongingnes, H. 
111) 

Horizont, horizontal: *horizon, *hori- 
zonal 

(fin. H. 1) 


das Ich: *the “I” 
Ichheit: *"I”-hood 
identifizieren: identify (feststellen, H. 


ER EN 
identisch: *identical 
(fin. H. 114) 
Illusion: *Illusion 
But cf. Schein (*illusion ; *semblance; 
etc.) 
in der Welt: *in the world 
But çf. innerweltlich (q.v.); innerhalb 
der Welt («v.). 
(fin. A. 13) 
indifferent, Indifferenz: *Indifferent; 
*undifferentiated; etc. 
But cf. gleichgültig (*Indifferent; 
*undifferentiated; etc. 
But cf. gleichgültig (*Indifferent). 
(fin. H. 42) 
innerhalb der Welt: *within the world 
But cf. innerweltlich (g.v.); in der 
Welt (g.v.). 
(fin. H. 13) 
innerweltlich: *within-the-world 
But cf. in der Welt (g.v.); innerhalb 
der Welt (¢.v.). 
(fin. H. 13) 
innerzeitig: *within-time 
In-Sein, In-sem: *Being-in £ 
intendieren: *ıntend 


(fin. H. 5) 


intentional: *intentional 


Glossary of German Expressions 


interpretieren, Interpretation: *Inter- 
pret, *Interpretation 
But cf. auslegen (*interpret; lay out) 
(fin. p. 1) 
Inwendigkeit: *insideness 
isolieren: *isolate 


(fin. H. 142) 


je meines, Jemeinigkeit: *in each case 
mine, *mineness 

jeweilig: *current; at the time; par- 
ticular; any, etc. 

jeweils: in every case; on each occasion; 
always; any; sometimes (H. 60); etc. 


kennen: know; be acquainted; ac- 
quaintance (der Bekannte, H. 
107, 118) 

But cf. kenntlich (g.v.); Kenntnis 
(q.v.); erkennen (g.v.). 

(fin. H. 124, 146) 

kenntlich: recognizable 

But cf. kenntiich machen (designate, 
H. 151, 351; acquaint, H. 392); 
kennen (g.v.); Kenntnis (g.v.). 

Kenntnis: information; acquaintance; 
knowledge; eic, 

But cf. Kenntnisnahme, Kenntnis 
nehmen ("take cognizance; 
acquire information; et. ); Ken- 
nen (g.v.); Erkenntnis (q.u.). 

(fi tn, H. 46, 53) 

-können: *potentialüity for... .; etc. 

(Note: compounds ending in ‘-können’ 
are very numerous and have usually been 
translated by ‘potentiality for. ..’. In 
other contexts the verb ‘können’ has been 
translated mere freely.) 

Konstitution: * Constitution 

But cf. Verfassung (*constitution) 

(fin. E. &) 

Konstituens, 
tivum, 
consutute, 
sungs-) 

Kontinuität, kontinuierlich: 
uity, *Conit:uous 

But cf. Stetigkes, stetig (*continuity, 
* continuov3). 


(fin. A. 423) 


Lage: *situatior. 


(fin. F. 299) eye 
(Note: compcunds terminating tn ‘-lage’ 
are aiways transiated in other ways.) 


R 


könstituieren, Konstitu- 
korstitutiv: “constituent, 
constitutive (Verfas- 


* Contin- 


513 


laufen, Lauf: run; course 
(fin. H. 243) on 
(Note: most words terminafıng in 
‘-laufen’ or ‘-lauf” have bein trans- 
lated with either ‘run’ or ‘course’. 
Exceptions: Anlauf, anlaufen, durch- 
pe Jortlaufen, verlaufen, zuwider- 
en. 
Leben, "life, *live 
But cf. ableben (*demise, , erieden, 
Erlebnis (*Experience); lebendig 
(alive; *lively; "vital; etc): 
Lebensalter (*age); Lebensdauer 
(*longevity) ; Nur-noch-leben 
(mere aliveness). 

(fin. H. 46, 58) 
leicht: light; easy 
(fin. Fi. 360) 
Leitfaden: *clue; 

Licht: light, ete. 
But cf. lichten, Lichtung (¢.v.). 
(fir. H. 133) 
lichten, ne, Gelichtetheit: *clear 
(verb), “clearing (noun), *clearec- 
ness; ‘ete. 
But cf. Licht (g.v.). 
(fin. A. 133). 


das Man: *the “they” 


(nA, 113, 129, 259) 
das Man-selbst: *the they-seif 


*ruiding-iine, 


(fin. 5. 129) 
Mann’gfaltigkeit: multiziicitv; mari- 
fola 
-mässig 
(ote: Heidegger uses at least twen®- 


three compounds fermiinchng in 
‘“.mässig’, some of them (notally 
‘daseinsmassig’ and ‘nichidaseinsnés- 
sig’) very frequently. The origina! 
meaning of this sufix ts :oughly ‘after 
the measure of’, but Heidegger seems 
to use it primarily as just a device fer 
constructing adjectives cr edverbs fram 
nouns. We have made no effort te 
translate it systematically, though in a 
Sew cases we have used ‘in accordance 
with’ (e.g. "bedeutungsinässig’, “be 
wandinismässig’,  ‘“situationsmdssig’, 
‘stimmungsmassig’, "weltmässig’). 
meinen: mean; have in view; have in 
mind; suppose; stand for; etc. 
But. cf. Meinung (opinion; suppose. 
elc.); vermeinen ef. (suppose; 


514 
meinen—.cont. 
presume; elc.); Vormeinung (as- 
sumption) ; Mitgemeinte 
(*connotation). 
. H. 2) 
melden: *announce 
(fin. H. 20° 
Methode, = aneth odie! *method ; 
*methoologicai: * methodical (H. 
49, 362 y 
But cf. -icthodiz, Methodologie 
(q.v.). 
Methodik, .iethodologie: *methaod- 


ology 
But cf. M:tisode, methodisch (g.v.:. 


Missmut: *°. .:umour 
(Jin. H. ı::' 
mit: with; et: 
(fin. H. 84; 
(Note: there are ‚very forty compounds 


in which 'mit-’ has been used as a 
prefix. With about a dozen rather 
unimportant exceptions, we have trans- 
lated these with the help of ‘with’, 
‘too’, or the prefix ‘co-’. D 
Mit-dabei-sein: *Being 
with someone 
Mitdasein: *Dasein-with 
But cf. mit-da-sein. 
mit-da-sein: *be there with us 
But çf. Mitdasein. 
miteinander: *with one another 
But cf. miteinanderteilen (mutual 
sharing, H. 155). 
mitnehmen: *take along; *carry along 
an Being-with (Sein mit . . „H. 


“in on it” 


263) 

(Note: this expression is usually followed 
by a prepositional phrase introduced by 
‘mit’. Rather than writing ‘Being- 
with with . . .’, we have usually 
omitted the second ‘wtth’.) 

mitteilen: communicate (*Kommuni- 
kation, H. 398f); present (H. 26, 
72 n. i) 
But gf. teilen mit . 
impart, H. 168). 
Mitwelt: *with-world 
Modus: “mode 
(fin. H. 20, 59) 


Moment: *item; *momentum (H. 271) 

But cf.: momentan (*momentary); 

mornentweise (*from moment to 
moment). 


. (*share with 


Being and Time 


nacheinander: *successive, *succession 

But cf. Sukzession (*Succession); 
Sich-jagen (*rapid succession, H. 
322). 

rıchhängen: *hanker 

rachreden: *gossip 

Nachsehen: inspectior 
ness (H. ı23) 

(fin. H. 123) 

“achsicht: *forbearan:e 

But cf. unnachsichtig (relentless, 

Hz. 907). 

(fin. H. 123) 

nachspringen: *leap after 
(fin. H. 347) 
nah: close (adj.); ete. 

But cf. zunächst (*proximally; *in the 
first instance; etc.) 

(fin. H. 6) 

(Note: while we have usually translated 
ihis expression and its derivatives by 
variants of ‘close’, the superlative 
‘nächst’ occasionally appears as ‘next’, 
‘first’, ‘proximate’, ‘most intimate’, etc. 
Exceptions: ‘nahelegen’ ; ‘naheltegen’.) 

Nähe: closeness; etc. 

(fin. H. 102) 

(Note: with a few trivial exceptions, the 
phrase ‘in der Nahe’ and ‘innerhalb der 
Nahe’ are translated as ‘close by’.) 

Natur: *Nature; natural (natürlich) 
nebeneinander: *side by side 
Neugier: *curiosity 

(fin. H. 346, 347) 

Nichtheit: *notness 
nichtig: *null; *nugatory (H. 237); 
*which count for nothing (H. 344) 

But cf. vernichten (*annihilate; 
*nullify). 

(fin. H. 283) 

Nichtmehrdasein: *no-longer-Dasein 

But cf. Nicht-mehr-da-sein (*no- 
longer-Being-there); Nicht-mehr- 
dasein-können (*no-longer-being- 
able-to-be-there). 

(fin. H. 250) 

das Niemand: *the “nobody” ù 
nivellieren: *level off 
das Noch-nicht: *the “not-yef” 

But cf. vorläufig noch nicht (*not 
right away). 
(fm. H. 259) 
Nur-immer-schon-bei: 

already-alongside 

(fin. H. 195) 


* verfunctori- 


*just-always-. 


Glossary of German Expressions 


nur-noch-vorhanden: *just present-at- 
hand-and-no-more 


(fin. H. 74) 


Ovjekt: "Object 
Bui 7f, Gegenstai,T. ec. (object). 
“fin. I. 263) 
Üfterbor, offenbaren, manifest; open 
up (H. 124) | 
öffentlich, Öffentlichkeit: *public; 
*publicness 
But cf. veröffentlichen (“make public; 
*give a public character). 
Ohnmacht: *powerlessness 
(fin. H. 384) 
ontisch: *ontical, *ontico- 
(Jin. H. 13, 12) 
Ontologie, ontologisch: ‘*ontology, 
*ontological, *ontologico- 
(fin. H. 11, 12) 
Ort: *locus; *location; *locative; place 
(H. 399, 432 n. xxx); etc. 
(fin. H. 44) 


pflegen: be accustomed to. . 
after; etc. 
( fin. H. 54) 
Platz, platzieren: place 
But cf. Schauplatz (*arena, H. 388) 
praktisch: *practical 
(fin. H. 69) oe 
Privation, privativ: *privation, *pri- 
vative 
(Jin. H. 58) 
Projektion: *Projection 
But cf. entwerfen, Entwurf (*pro- 
jection, eic.) 


(fin. H. 124) 


Raum, räumlich: *space; 
*spatio-; room (H. 103) 
But ¢f. Spielraum (*leeway); einräu- 
men (*make room); umräumen 
(*move around: *rearrange); 
wegräumen (*move out of the way; 
clear away). 
( fin. H. 111, 368) 
Raum-geben: *give space 
(fin. H. 111) 
real: *Real; *realia (H. 68) 
But cf. eigentlich (*real, *authentic; 
élc.). 
Ber aa *reckon; account; *calculus 
(H. 159) 
But cf. anrechnen (deem); ausre- 
chnen, berechnen (*calculate) ; 


.; *look 


*spatial, 


515 


errechnen, rechnerisch (*com- 
pute}; vorrechnen (*accvuse), 

Rear. ieden: valk; *diserurse; words 
‘H. 30); say (H. 32) 

But ef. Ausrede  (*-bterfuge); 
nachreden (*gossip); überreden 
\"persuade): verabreeca (*stipu- 
late; *make an anpointment); 
Vorrede (*preface); weiterreden 
(*pass the word along). Cf. also 
bereden (*talk about); aufreden, 
einreden (*talk into); etc. 

(fin, H. 25, 160) 

Region: *realm 

But cf. Gegend (*region). 

(fin. H. 103) 

Reife, reifen: *ripeness, *ripen 

(fin. H. 244) 

Relation: *Relation 

But cf. Beziehung, Bezug, Verhältnis 
(*relation, *relationship, etc.) 

richten: direct (verb); regulate 

But cf. aufrichten (set up, H. 420); 
ausrichten (g.v.); berichten (re- 
port); einrichten (arrange; et.); 
Richtung (g.v.) verrichten (per- 
form); zurichten (*adapt). 

( fin. H. 102) 

Richtung: direction; direct (H. 114); 
movement (H. 38, 47); field (H. 
131) 

Rücksicht: regard ; *considerateness; etc. 

But cf. rücksichtslos (*inconsiderate; 
relentless, H. 333). 

(fin. H. 123) 

Ruf, rufen: call 

But cf. Anruf, anrufen (g.v.); Aufruf, 
aufrufen (g.v.); ausrufen (q.v.); 
Beruf, berufen (g.v.); hervorrufen 
(*conjure up. H. 175; *evoke, 
H. 401); Widerruf (q.v.). 

( fin. H. 269, 273, 291) 

rügen: *reprove 

rühren: touch 


Sache: thing; matter; affair; etc. 

(fin. H. 27) 

(Note: most of the compounds based on 
this stem have been translated with the 
aid of one of the three expressions 
listed, or with ‘fact’? or ‘subject- 
matter’. Exceptions: ‘sachlich’ (q.v.) ; 
‘Ursache’ (‘cause’).). 

die Sachen selbst: * the things themselves 
( fin. H. 27) | 


516 


sachlich: *objective 
But of. Sache (g.v.); objectiv (*Ob- 
jective). 
Satz: *proposition; “sentence; prin- 
ciple (*Prinzip; Grundsatz) 
(Note: compounds beginning with ‘Satz’ 


have been translated with the aid of 


‘proposition’ or ‘propositional’, but 
compounds with ‘-satz’ as a suffix have 
always been handled in other ways.) 

Schein: "semblance; ‘illusion; seem 
(H. 176) 

But cf. Illusion (*Illusion). 

(Note: except for the adjectios ‘schein- 

bar’, compounds based om this stem 

are not translated by amp of the 

expressions here listed.) ; 
scheinen: seem 

(fin. H. 29) 

Schicksal: *fate | 

But cf. fatal (*fatal) 

(fin. H. 384) 

-~schliessen, Schluss: include; conclude; 
infer; close; etc. 

But cf. abschliessen, Abschluss (¢.v.); 
anschliessen, Anschluss (attach; 
etc), aufschliesen, Aufschluss 
(g.v.) ; ausschliessen (exclude, rules 
out, prevent); beschliessen (g.v.); 
einschliessen (include; *enclose, 
H. 60); entschliessen, Entschluss 
(q.v.); erschliessen (¢.v.); umsch- 
liessen (*close round); verschlies- 
sen (g.v.); zusammenschliessen (fit 
together). 

(fin. H. 330) 

Schon-sein-bei: *Being-already-along- 
side 

(fin. H. 195) 

Schon-sein-in: *Being-already-in 

(fin. H. 329) 

Schuld: *guilt; *debt; *responsibility 

But cf. Unschuld (innocence, H. 
292); Verschuldung *indebted- 


ness). 
(fin. H. 242, 280) 
Schuld haben an .. .: *have responsi- 
bility for... 
schuld sein an . . .: be responsible for 
(schuldig) 
Schulden haben: *have debts 
Schulden machen: *incur debts 
schulden: owe 


( fin. H. 281) 


Being and Time 


schuldig: *guilty; responsible 

But cf. schuldig werden (g.v.). 

(fin. H. 280, 281, 282, 287) 

sich schuldig machen: *make oneself 
guilty; *make oneself responsible 

Schuldigsein: *Being-guilty 

(fin. H. 281) 

schuldig werden: 
*become guilty 

schweigen: *keep silent; *silence 
- But cf. stillschweigend (tacit); ver- 
schwiegen (*reticent) 

schwer: heavy, ek. 

(fin. H. 360) 

sehen: see; look; etc. 

But cf. Nachsehen (g.v.), etc. 

(fin. H. 69, 171) 

(Note: in most cases where Heidegger 
seems to be concerned with seeing or 
looking when he uses compounds 
involuing ‘sehen’, we have translated 
them accordingly, but not otherwise.) 

seiend: being (sein; etc.); entity (H. 
130); is; are 

(fin. H. 1, 3) 

Seiendes: entity (seiend, H. 130); 
*entities; that which is (H. 154); 
what is (H. 96) 

( fin. H. 1, 3) 

sein: be; being (seiend) 

(fin. H. 1, 326) 

Sein: *Being 

( fin. H. 1, 4) 

(Note: we have counted 48 compounds 
beginning with ‘Sein-’ and as many as 
106 terminating with ‘-Sein’, or more 
Srequently ‘-sein’. With very few excep- 
tions these have been handled with 
‘Being’ or occasionally ‘being’. Except 
Sor ‘Bewusstsein and‘ Dasein’ and some 
of their compounds, none of the exceptions 
occurs more than once, and we have 
usually indicated the German reading. 
Cf. ‘Enthaltensein’ (‘is contained’); 
‘Enthobensein’ (‘has been alleviated’) ; 
‘Hingegebensein’ (‘devotion’) ; ‘In-der- 
Welt-gewesensein’ (*having-been-in- 
the-world’); Nicht-mehr-sein (‘ts 
*no longer’); ‘Noch-nicht- zugänglich- 
geworden-sein’ (‘has not yet become 
*accessible’); ‘Oberfallensein’ (‘is 
*assatled’) ; ‘Nochnichtbeisammensein’ 
(‘ts not yet all together’). 

Sein-bei, Sein bei... .: *Being alongside 

(fin. H. 54, 141, 329) 


*come to owe; 


Glossary of German Expressions 


Seinkönnen: *potentiality-for-Being 
(fin. H. 250) 
Seinssinn, Sinn des Seins: *meaning of 
Being 
Seinsverfassung : *constitution of Being; 
*state of Being; “constitutive state 
of Being; etc.. 
Sein zu. ..: *Being towards 
(fin. H. 4 
Sein zum Ende: *Being-towards-the- 
end) 
But ae Zu-Ende-sein 


end) 

(fin. H. 234) 

Sein sum Tode: *Being-towards-death 

(fin. H. 4, 262) 

selbig: *selfsame 
(fin. H. 114) 
Selbst: *Self 

But cf. sich, selbst (itself, oneself, etc.) 

(fin. H. 114) 

(Note: most of the compounds based on 
‘Selbst’ have been translated with either 
‘Self’ or ‘self’ or, more rarely, ‘itself’, 
‘oneself’, etc. Exceptions: ‘Selbstge- 

‘Selbstmord’ 

(*be- 

‘selbstwerständlich (*‘self- 
evident’ ; ‘obvious’).) 

selbstandig: *self-subsistent 

But cf. Sclbst-ständigkeit (*Self-con- 
constancy); Unselbstandigkeit 
(*failure to stand by one’s Self; 
etc.); Unselbst-ständigkeit ( *non- 


Seif-constancy). 
(fin. 117, 128, 291, 303, 322, 332 
375 
Selbsterkenntnis: *knowledge of. the 
Self 


(fin. H. 124, 146) 
Sellawein: *Being-one's-Self; *Being- 
its-Self; ete. 
Sichkennen: knowing-oneself 
(fin. H. 124, 146) 
Sicht: sight (noun) sichtbar (q.v 
But cf. sichten (g.v.) ; sicht r a v.); 
Nachsicht (g.0.); Rücksicht (g.v.), 
Umsicht (g.v.). 
(fin. H. 69, 123) 
(Note: a few obvious exceptions, the 
word neh is not used in translating 
compounds i ing ‘Sicht’. 
a me. (*sichtig, H . 149); 


dicken: sight (verb) ; *sift (H. 51, 394) 


(*Being-at-an- 


517 
en *sightlessness 

(fin. H 

Sich- „vorweg: (See vorweg.) 
Sinn: *meaning; *sense (noun); etc. 

(fin. H. 1, 137, 151) 

(Note: most compounds based on ‘Sinn’ 
have been translated with some deriv- 
ative of ‘sense’ or ‘mean’. Exceptions: 
‘sinnend’ (‘thoughtfully’); “besinnen’ 
(g.v.); ‘ansinng’  (*‘univocal’) ; 
“tiefsinnig’ (*‘deep’); ‘widersinnig’ 
(*‘absurd’); "sinnlich" (**sensory ; 
*“sensuous’).) 

Situation: *Situation 

But of. Grenzsituation (*limit-situa- 
tion). 

(fin. H. 299) 

(Note: see note on ‘situation’ in the Index 
of English Expresstons.) 

Sorge: *care 

But cf. besorgen (g.v.); Besorgnis 
(q.v.); Fürsorge (g.v.); vorsorgen 
(take precautions, H. 406, 413). 

(fin. H. 57, 121, 171) 

Spanne, spannen: *span 

But cf. gespannt (*spanned ; *intent; 
*drawn tense, H. 374) ; umspannen 
(*span round, H. 374; encompass, 
i Au, ; weitgespannt ac H. 


(fin. Ë. 409 
Spielraum: way 
(fir. H. 368) | 
Sprache, Sprach-, sprachlich: 
guage; *linguistic 
B»: :-f, Aussprache (discussion, H. 
51 n. xi; pronouncing, H. 161); 
Fürsprache (*interceding, H. 
m; Rücksprache (consulting, 
H. 161); Selbstgespräch (*solilo- 
quy); Sprachgebrauch (usage). 
. H. 25) 
spreizen: (+ aufspreizen.) 
ständig: constant (*konstant, H. 416) 
But of. Abständigkeit (g.v.); Boden- 
ständigkeit (*indigenous character, 
. oe *grounds to stand on, H. 
. eigenständig (*autoncmous; 
e Er own right; ei.) ; selbständig 
j); vollständig (complete). 
N a 117, 128, 291, 303, 322, 332, 


Stätig.. en: ateadiness 
But cf. Stetigkeit (q.v.). 
(fin. H. 423) 


*lan- 


518 


Stelle: position; ete. 
stellen: Bu set; formulate ; raise. etc. 

(fin. H. 300) 

(Note: the numerous compounds of 
‘stellen’ do not call for any uniform 
policy of translation.) 

sterben: *die 

But cf. absterben, ersterben (*die 
away); der Gestorbene (the dead 
person, H. 238; etc.); der Verstor- 
bene (*the deceased); sterblich 


(*mortal); unsterblich (*im- 
mortal). 

stetig, Stetigkeit: *continuous, *con- 
tinuity 


But cf. Statigkeit (¢.v.); kontinuier- 
lich, Kontinuitat (*Continuous; 
*Continuity). 

(fin. H. 423) 

stilllegen: *immobilize 
(fin. H. 371) 
Stimme- *voice 

But cf. stimmen (¢.v.); Stimmung 

(g.v.); einstimmig (agreed), etc 
stimmen: “attune; fit (H. 78); 
mood (See note.) . 

But cf. nestimmen (g.v.); überein- 
stliamen, zustimmen, zusammen- 

stimmen, einstimmig (agree); 

: Ungestimmtheit (*lack of mood’). 

(fin. H. 134) 

(Note: wrile the participle ‘gestimmt is 
occastonaily translated by some form 
of ‘attune, it is far more often 
translated Sy variants of ‘have a mocd’, 
as are its derivatives ‘Gestimmtheit’ 
and ‘Lestimmtsein’.) 

Stimmung: *mood 
But cf. Verstimmung (*bad mood). 
(fin. H. 134, 144) 

Struktur: *structure 

Subjekt: *subject (noun) 

(Note: all compounds based on ‘Subjekt 
have been translated with the help of 
the noun ‘subject? or the adjective 
‘subjective’; but the verb ‘subject’ has 
been used only in translating other \ex- 
pressions, and the noun ‘subject matter’ 
has been reserved for expressions dertved 
from ‘Sache’—chiefly ‘sachhaltig’.) 

Substanz: *substance 

(Jin. H. 303) 


tasten: touch, *grope; *feel one’s way 
by touch 


Being and Time 


But cf. antasten (impair, H. 227); 
unantastbar (*unimpeachable, H. 


je 
Tatbectand: *facts of the case; *how 
things stand (H. 242) 
But cf. Bestand (g.v.) 
Tatsache: fact 
But cf. Faktum (*Fact). t 
tatsächlich: *factual 
(fin. H. 7, 56, 135) 
temporal: *Temporal 
But d T (*tenses, H. 349) 
(fin. H. 17) 
Thema, AN thematisieren: 
Cae *thematic, *thematize 
(fin. H. 2) 
tilgen: *pay off; annul (H. 434) 


überantworten: “deliver over 
(fin. H. 21) 
übereinstimmen: agree 
überfallen: *assail 
übergeben: transmit 
(fin. H. 21) 
übergehen, 
*transition; el& 
überholen: *outstrip 
überhören: *fail to hear 
(fin. H. 271) 
überkommen: conie down, traditional 
(fin. H. 21, 383) 
überiassen: abandon; etc. 
überlegen: *deliberate (verb) 


pass over; 


But cf. ihe adjective überlegen’ 
(‘superior’). 
überliefern: *hand down; come dowr; 
traditional 
(fin. H. 21, 
übernehmen, O une take over 


(entnehmen, H. 61, 259); etc. 
(fin. H. 383) 
überspringen: pass over 
überwinden: *overcome; *surmount; 
_ *conquest (H. 105) 
hie ag at *conviction 
(fin. H. 256) 
um: around; about; in order to; etc. 
(fin. H. 8, 65, 69, 11, 141) 
Umgang, umgehen: “dealings; *deal; 
ek, 


But cf. unumgänglich (inevitable; 
indispensable ; ern H. 
125); es geht... um -- - (*--- 


is an issue for . 


(fin. H. 8, 65, 66) 


Glossary of German Expressions 


das Umhafte: *the aroundness 

(fin. H. 101) 

Umkreis: range (noun) 

(Note: the noun ‘range’ has been re- 
served for ‘Umkreis’ and a few in- 
Jrequent compounds in '-kreis’ or 
‘-weite’ ; the verb ‘range’ translates a 
few other expressions of little impor- 
tance.) 

umschlagen, Umschlag: *change over 
Umsicht: *circumspection 

(fin. H. 65, 69, 123) 
Umwelt: *environment 

fin. H. 65) 
das Umwillen: *the “‘for-the-sake-of”’ 
das Um-zu: *the “in-order-to” 

( fin. H. 65, 78) 

unausdriicklich : 
inexplicit 

unbestimmt: *indefinite; *undetermin- 
ed; *indeterminate (H. 3) 

unhezüglich: *non-relational 

(fin. H. 250) 

undurchsichtig: “opaque 
But of durchsichtig (*transparent) 
upendiich: *infintte; *unending (H. 


tacit; unexpressed; 


434) 
Buz cf. an-endlich (*in-finite). 
‘fir. £1, 230) 
unsehalten: *indignant; *not held on 
tO 
(Jin. H. 347) 
unheiralich: *uncanny 
Bui cf. beimlich (secret). 
(fin. H. 188) 
Unseibstandigkeit: *failyre to stand by 
itself 
But cf. Unselbst-standigkeit (*non- 
Self-constancy). 
(fin. H. 117, 322) 
Gmeischeiden- differentiate; discrim- 
inais; distinguish; differ; etc. 
(a. H. 429) 
Unte one difference; distinction; 


( a H. 429) 
unüberholbar: *not to be outstripped 
Ursprung: source 

But cf. ee (4.0.). 

(sin, H. 348 
es rs 
Bu: f. Ursprung (g..). 

(fia. H. 348) 


$ 


519 
verantwortlich: *answerable 
verbrauchen: use up (*aufbrauchen, 
H. 245) 
(fin. H. 333) 
verdecken: conceal; *cover up 
verdinglicien: *reify 

But cf. dinglich (*Thinglike). 

vereinzeln: *individualize 

(fin. H. 142) 

verenden: *perish 
verfallen: fall; deteriorate (verderben, 
H. 134) 
(fin. H. 21, 134, 175, 428) 
verfangen: *entangle 
Verfassung: *constitution; *constitu- 
tive state; state 

But cf. Verfassungsmoment (con- 
stitutive item); Verfassungsganz- 
heit (*constitutive totality). 

(fin. H. 8) 

Vergangenheit: past (vergangen) 

But cf. Vergänglichkeit (9); ver- 
gehen (@.v.). 

(fin. H. 326, 380) 

Vergänglichkeit: *transience 

But cf. Vergangenheit (g.v.). 

vergegenwärtigen: *envisage 

But cf. Gegenwart (*Present, etc.); 
gegenwärtigen (*make present). 

(fin. H. 359) 

vergehen: * pass away; transgress (über- 
schreiten} 

Bui cj. Vergangennelt (q.v.). 

(jin. H. 380) 

Noes the parlicibie ‘vergangen’ is some- 
iimes iranslated cs ‘passed away’, but 
more often simply as ‘past’.) 

vergewissern: *make certain 

(fin. H. 291) 

verhalten: behave, behaviour (®*sich 
gebarden, H. 128}; “comport, 
relate; inhibit (H. 253); attitude 

But cf. Verhältnis (q.0.). 

(fir. H. 34) 

Verhältnis: relationship, relation 
But py verhalten Gay 
(fin. FL 34) 
verhiillen: to yeil; to conceal 
veriassen : abandon; *forsake 
Verlauf: course; ete. 
Bus cf. verlaufen (run its course; go 


place (H, 352); defer (H. oa 


520 


vernehmen: perceive; be aware; ek. 

vernichten: *annihilate; *nullify 

Vernunft, vernünftig: reason; rational; 
*reasonable (H. 204) 


( fin. H. 34) l l 
veröffentlichen: *make public; *give 
a public character; “publish; 
*publication 


verraumlichen: *spatialize 
verrechnen: *reckon up 

But cf. rechnen, etc. (q.v.). 

(fin. H. 48, 300) 
Verschliessen: *close off 
Verschuldung: *indebtedness 

But cf. Schuld, schuldig, etc. (g.v.). 


verschwiegen, Verschwiegenheit: 
*reticent, *reticence 
Verstand, Verständnis, verstehen: 


“understanding; *understand 
But cf. verstandig (g.v.); verständlich 
(g.v.); verstandesmässig (*intel- 
lective, H. 98); Verstandeswesen 
(*something endowed with intel- 
ligence, H. 49). 
(fin. H. 143, 151) 
verständig, Verständigkeit: *common- 
sense, *common sense 
But of. Verstand, elc. (q.v.); unver- 
ständig (*lacking in understand- 
(pate 219); Vorverstandigung 
aa to an understanding, 
{r JI 
verständlich, Verständlichkeit: *intel- 
ligible, *intelligibility 
But of. Verstand, etc. (q.v.); 
selbatverstindlich (*self-evident; 
obvious); unmissverständlich (un- 
mistakable; etc.). 
verstellen: *disguise; obstruct (ver- 


; assign 
(fin. H. 31, 68, 70, 84, 408) 
verwenden: use; utilize (H. 333); 
SH eae put to use 


(fin. H 


Gerwirklicheas *actualize 


verwirren :*bewilder; confuse (*zusam- 


menwerfen; verwechseln, H. 138) 


-Vorhabe: 


Being and Time 


vollenden: fulfill; complete (verb) 
( fin. H. 243, 244) 
vor, vor-: *in the face of; *face to face 
with; fore-; pre-; forth; before; 
in advance; etc. 
(fin. H. 150, 184, 291, 327) 
vorausspringen: *leap ahead 
( fin. H. 122) 
vorfallen: *befall 
But cf. zu-fallen, Zu-fall (*be-fall). 
vorfinden, vorfindlich: come across; 
*show up (H. 108) 
Vorgabe: (See vorgeben.) 
vorgangig : previous; preliminary; 
prior; beforehand; first; etc. 
vorgeben, Vorgabe: present (verb); 
give; H. 204; etc. 
(fin. H. 150) 
vorgreifen: anticipate 
(fin. H. 150) 
Vorgriff: *fore-conception; *something 
we grasp in advance 
( fin. H. 150, 327) 
*fore-having; something we 
have in advance 
(fin. H. 150, 327) 
vorhaben: *have before us; “purpose 
H. 1 
EN, Vorhandenheit: *present- 
at-hand, *presence-at-hand 
(fin. H. 7, 25, 74, 106) 
vorkommen: *occur; *come before us 


vorlagern: *lie ahead of 

(fin. H. 259, 264, 302) 
vorlaufen: anticipate 

But cf. vorläufig (q.v.). 

(fin. H. 203 264, 302) 
ee By ab ge i 

at Ve orläufigkeit (*anticipatori- 

H. 302); vorläufig noch nich 
(*not right away, H. 255, 258); 


vorlaufen (g.2.). 
vorrufen: *call fo 
(fin. H. 273, 291) 
Vorsicht, Vorsicht: *fore-sight; 
“something we see in advance 


But cf. vorsichtig ar apie H. 
150; *with foresight, H. 257). - 
(fin. H. R 327) 


( fin. H. 122) 


Glossary of German Expresstons 


vorstehen: manage (H. 
going; preceding; etc 
(fin. H. 143) 
vorstellen, Vorstellung: represent, re- 
presentation; *lay before (H. 83); 
put before (H. 300); *ideation 
(H. 139) 
(fin. H. 217, 239, 300) 
Vor-struktur: *fore-structure 
(fin. H. 327) _ 
vorweg: *ahead, in advance 
But cf. Vorwegnahme (*foreseen, H. 
131); vorwegnehmen (take for 
granted, H. 147); “take in ad- 
vance, (H. 264); anticipate, H. 


391). 
(Jin. H. 329) 
vorwerfen: *reproach; *throw. before 
(fin. H. 145) 


Wahl, wählen: *choose, *choice 
But çf. Auswahi, auswählen (*select, 
*selection). 
Wahr, Wahrheit: *true, *truth . 
But cf. wahren, etc. (q.v.); währen, 
etc. (q.v.). wahrnehmen (g.v.). 
wahren: preserve (aufbewahren, H 
380; bewahren; ® verwahren; 
erhalten, H. 380; Sichretten, H. 


143); fore- 


342) 
But cf. wahr (g.v.); währen, ek. 


(q.0.). 
währen: endure (*fortwährend; *im- 
merwährend) 

But cf. wahr (g.v.); wahren, ek. 
(q.v.); während (g.v.); bewähren 
(confirm; prove, H. 72; *sub- 
stantiation, H. 209; ete.); Gewähr, 
gewähren, gewährleisten (guaran- 
tee, assure, grant, etc.) 

das “während”: *the ‘during’ 

But cf. währen, etc. (q.v.). 

wahrnehmen: perceive 

But çf. wahr (g.v.). 

wegräumen: *move out of the way; 
clear away (lichten) 
weitersagen: *pass along in further 
retelling; *further retelling 
Welt: *world 
But of. Umwelt (*environment). 
(fin. H. 63, 73) 
weltlich: *worldiy; *after the manner 
of the world; *in a worldly way 
(H. 276) | 


521 


But cf. Weltlichkeit (g.v.); inner 
weltlich j v.); entweltlichen (g.v. aay. 


weliaat *worldhood 
But cf. weltlich (g.v.); Innerweltlich- 
' fits (g.v.); entweltlichen (q.v.). 
Welteuisaighete: *worldly character 
But cf. weltmässig (in-accordance- 
with-the-world, H. 104); Welt- 
charakter (*world-character). 
(fin. H. 63) 
werfen, Wurf: *throw;. cast H. 415) 
But of. entwerfen, Entwurf“ (g.0.) 5 
hinwerfen (*put forward casually, 
H. 311); hinauswerfen (*emit, 
+ 111); unterwerfen (subject, 
H. 78); verwerfen (rejection, H. 
32); vorwerfen (q.v.); zusammen- 
werfen (confuse). 


(Jin. H. 135, 145) 
erk: work 
But cf. bewerkstelligen (accomplish; 
stc.); handwerklich (mechanical, 
H. 394); Werkzeug, etc. (*tool, 
sic.; *equipment for working, 
H. 68). 
(fin. H. 70) 
Wesen, wesenhaft, wesentlich: *essence 
*essential; creature (Gebild) 
But cf. sein Wesen treibt (*is haunted 
by, H. 992); Lebewesen (*some- 
thing living); eee ee 
(*information service, H. 126); 
Verstandeswesen (*som 
endowed with intelligence, H. 
49); Essenz (*Essence). 
(fin. H. 117) 
das Wider: the “against” (H. 210) 
Widerruf: *disavowal 


(fin. H. 386) | 

widerstehen, Widerstand: resist, re- 
sistance 

das Wie: *the “how” 

wiederholen: *repeat; *restate; *re- 


capitulate (H. 51, 234); "*over 
again (H. 17, 392); raise again 


-4 
(fin. H. 308, 339, 385, 386) 
wirklich: fac ; 
But cf. aktuell (right now, H. 374). 
( fin. H. 7) 
wissen: know 
But cf. Nichtwissen (*ignorance). 


522 


Wissenschaft, wissenschaftlich :*science, 
*scientific ; “scholarly (H. 32); 
learned (adj` (H. 171); *as a 
branch of knowledge (H. 225) 

But cf. vorwissenschaftlich (*pre- 
scientific; *colloquial, H. 52). 
das Wobei: *the “in-which”; *the 
“whereat” (H. 107); ek. 
(Nate: see our entry on ‘bei’ above.) 
das Wofür: the *for-which” 
Wozu, H. 414) 

das Woher: *the ‘whence’ 

das Wohin: *the ‘whither’ 

wohnen: *reside; accustom (pflegen) 

(fin H. 54) 

wollen: *want; will; *volition (H. 136, 

139); insist upon (H. 253, 265); 


(das 


> ete. 
das Womit: *the ‘with-which’; ef. 
das Woraufhin: *the ‘upon-which’ etc. 
(Note: ‘woraufhin’ has been translated 
in many ways, depending on she 
contexts.) 
das Woraus: *the “whereof” 
das Worin: *the “wherein”; ex. 
das Worinnen: *the “inside-which”; 


ek. 
das Worüber, das Worum; 
which; ate. 
fin. H. 131) 
orumwilleu; “the “for-tue-t: ket 
of-which”; ete 


about 


das 


das Wovor: that in the face of which; 
ehe. 
das Wozu: *the “‘itowards-which”; the 
“for-which”’ (H. 414) 
(fin, H. 78, 84, 414) 
Wurf: throw (werfen) 
But cf. Entwurf (projection). 
Zeichen: sign 
But cf. Anzeichen (symptom; *be- 
token, H. 185); Üührungszei- 


chen (*quotation mark); Frage- 
zeichen ("question mark); ; Vor- 
. zeichen ("warning signal). 
zeigen: show; indicate 
But cf. Anzeige, anzeigen (indicate; 
call attention) ; aufzeigen (exhibit; 
point out; point to; *point at, H. 
215);-Zeiger (*pointer). 
(fin. H. 29, 77, 122, 178, 304) 
Zeit: time; era (H. 401 
But cf. Zeitbestimmtheit (*temporal 
character, H. 203, 370; *temporal 


Being and Tim 


atiribute, H. 333); zeitgenössisch 
(*contemporaneous) ; Zeitigen 
(g.u.); zeitlebens (*for its lifetime; 
*for life, H. 370); zeitlich (q.v.); 
Zeitstufe (*temporal stage); F ‘olge- 
zeit (*posterity); Zeitalter (era); 
unzeitgemäss (*out of season). 


(fin. H. 304, 329) 


Zeitablesung, Ablesung der Zeit: 
*reading off the time; *telling the 
time (H. 70) 

Zeitangabe, Zeit angeben: “assigning 
a time 

(fin, H. 408) | 
zeitigen: *temporalize; “bring to 
maturity; bring about {*her- 


beiführen, H. 261) 
(fin. H. 22, 122, 178, 235, 405) 
zeitlich: *tempora! 
But cf. neuzeitlich (of ı.x. 
H. 49); temporal (*'T 
(fin. H. 17, 304 
sich zeitnehmen: *take one’ time 
Zeitrechnung: *time-recxoring 
zergliedern: *dissect 
zerstreuen: *disperse; *dis.ract 


a 


Zeug: "equipment; *itera =f myuin 
ment 
But cf. Schreibzeug (inks auc: 


“equipment for writin): “chub- 
zeus ("footgear); Werkzeug (goni, 
Zeugnis (g. ‘ ). 

{ fin. H. 68, 79) 
ugganzheit: *equip- 


Zeugganze, 
mental totality, *totality of equip- 
ment 

Zeugnis: *testimony; document 


(*Dokument, *dokumentieren) 
das zu: the “towards” 

(fin. H. 84, 329) 

(Note: the preposition ‘zu’ has of 
course been translated in many other 
ways.) 

Zu-Ende-sein: *Being-at-an-end 

But cf. Sein zum Ene (*Being- 
towards-the-end) 

(fin. H. 234) 

Zufall, zufällig; *accident, *accidental; 
*chance; *haphazard (H.- "97, 
398); *incidental (H. 310) 

But cf. Zu-fall, zu-fallen (q.v.). 

(fin. H. 300) 

Zu-fall, zu-fallen: *be-falling, *be-fall 

, But of. Zufall, sufallen (q.0.). 

(fin. H. 300) 


e 


Glossary of German Expressions 


Zugang, zugangl.ch: *access, *acces- 


sible 
(fin. H. 44) 
zugehörig, zugehören: belong to 
(fin. H. 163) 
zuhanden, Zuhandenheit: *ready-to- 
hand, *readiness-to-hand 
But cf. zur Hand (g.v.). 
(fin. H. 25, 74, 104, 106) 
das Zuhause: *the “at-home” 
zukommen: come towards; beiong to; 
go with ex. 
(fin. H. 325, 329) 
(Note: whenever ‘zukommen’ is used 
with the preposixion ‘auf’, it is trans- 
lated by ‘corne towards’ ; but when it is 
used wiih: the dative, it is translated in 
other ways. It ts apparently not used in 
other constructions.) 
Zukunft: "future (ww) 


But cf. Zu-kunit (¢.v.): zukünftig 
(e.v.). 
( fin. H. 325, 920) . 
Zu-kunft: ‘the future as coming 
towards 


Eut cf. Zukunft (g.v.). 
(fin. Fi. 325) 
zukünftig: *futural "furore sur. ci. 141, 
341, 343) 
ut of. Zukunft {g.e 


oy Zukümigkeit 


(*utural character, H. 395; 
*futurity, H. us). 
(fix. H. 329) 


zuineist: *for the most part, * mostly 
(fin. H. 16) 
zumuten: *exaci (verb); impose (H. 39) 


523 

But cf. rächen sich (*exact their 
penalty, H. 174). 

zunächst: “proximally; "in the first 


instance; first; right now (H. 253); 
ek. 
But cf. nächst. (See entry on ‘nah’ above.) 
(fin. H. 6, 16) 
zur Hand: *to hand 
But cf. zuhanden ig.r.). 
das Zurück auf: *the “back te’ 
(fin. H. 320) 
zurückko:nmen: *ccme back 
(fin. H. 320, 383), 
zurücknehmen, Zurücknahrme: *take 


back 
(fin. H. 308, 344) | 
Zusammenhang, zusammenhängen: 
*connectucn, *connect; *inier- 


commection, *inserconnect; *con- 
text; *haug together 
Fu-scin; to be 
g fin. H: 42) 
ZUWEISEN ASST} eet; give (H. 554) 
(ser. H. 83, a: j 
eweide sug: t; ‘arab: SACUS 
Brt j. deprit. ‘utig (*gets used in 
two wave; teube signification): 


Toppelsine: double meaning); 
Dopreibeis s aag (deubie signi- 
heation;; vis low atig ( ("uas many 
signifcaticcs: As used in sevsral 
ways), 

das Zwischen: "re "between ` 


(Note: in compuanes "Zwischen is 
often transice? as "intermedisis!) 


INDEX OF ENGLISH EXPRESSIONS 


oe prio ri. 

(See Index of Latin Expressions.) 
tabandon: eben, verlassen (H. 
überlassen 

a. to oneself: H. 141, 192, 277, 308, 


347, 305 
a. to one’s own null basis: H. 348 
a. to one’s having-been: H. 365 
a. to having made a choice: H. 384 
a. to definite possibilities: H. 270 
a. to one’s thrownness: H. 945 
a. to the disposal of the “ihey H 


a. to the world: H. 172, 412 
a. to a ‘world’: H. 356, 406, 4ıaf. 
a, to the past: H. 386 
the “about which”: das Worum; das 
Worüber 


4 
of fear: H. E 
H. 187f, 191, 251, 266, 


das ot worüber 


of assertion: nn 218, 224 
of discourse or H. 161f, 164, 
168, 272 
of judgment: H. 216 
absolute: absolut; schlechthinnig 
(utter; etc.) 


absolut: H. 229, 918, 432-434 
absorb, be absorbed : aufgehen 


ängli 
(fin. H. 44) 


account 
(See due on account, settle an ac- 
count, take account.) 
acquaint, acquaintance, be acquainted: 
kennen, Kenntnis; kenntlich 
machen (H. 392); des Bekannte 
(H. 107, 118) 
act, action: *Akt, *Aktion; handeln; 
etc. a. (Ses entry for ‘take action’ 


) 
But <f. activity (*Aktivitat; *Tätig- 
keit; Treiben; etc.) 
TAkt; 47f (Scheler); 115, 119, 139 
(Scheler), 193, 352, 391 
actual, ey *wirklich, *Wirklich- 
cit 
(fin. H. 7) 
a. and ibility: H. 98,:149, 195, 
236, 243, 254, 261f, 299, 347 
‘world’-a. : . 62, 195 > 
a. of Things: H. 99 
‘external a.’ (Dilthey) : H. 205 n. xv 
historical a.: H. 10, 378 
validity as ‘form’ of a.: H. 156 
‘a. u H. 229 
rn as ' subsisting (Stoker) : 
H. 272 n. vi 
agreement with a.: H. 62 
momentary a., etc.: H. 373f 
tactualize, actualization: *verwirk- 
lichen 
H. 261f, 293, 385, 434f 
addiction: *Hang; hängen an (de- 


182, 194-196, 345 
drem: ansprechen (consider); *ad- 
ressieren; wenden an 
(fia. I. $4, 408) 
advance 
(See grasp in a., have in a., see in a. 
take in a.) 
faesthetic: ogres 
H. 396, 399f, 40 
affect, affection: veAffekt, *Affektion, 
re betreffen (pertain, ete.); 


But of. affectation (Manier). 
H. 197-140, 142, a 341, 345f 


Index of English Expressions 


the afraid: *sich fürchten 
(fin. H. 142) 
H. 141f, 186, 189, 341f 
the “against”: das Wider 
H. 210 
aggregate: das All (totality); Gesam- 
theit (H. 366); *Inbegriff (H. 65) 


the aggregate of entities: H. 8, 14, 
64, 241, 248 

the aggregate of the present-at- 
hand: H. 362 


(Note: this list includes those pas- 
sages in which ‘das All’ has been 
translated as ‘totality’ .) 

agree, agreement: übereinstimmen; 
*zustimmen; *zusammenstim- 
men; *einstimmig 
f*übereinstimmen:H. 33, 62, 214-225 
teinstimmig: H. 281, 413, 418 
ahead: vorweg | 
But cf. lie ahead (*vorlagern); leap 
ahead (*vorausspringen). 
fahead of itself: sich vorweg 
(fin. H. 329) 
H. 191-196, 202, 220, 227f, 236, 244, 
249-251, 259, 277,315, 317, 322, 
327, 337, 406, 425 
alarm: *erschrecken 
H. 142 
alien: fremd (*foreign; strange, etc.) 
But cf. befremden (seem strange, em- 
barrass) 
H. 121, 172, 275, 277f, 356 
falienate: *entfremden 
H. 178, 180, 254, 346f, 396 
alleviate: entheben (exempt); erleich- 
tern 
H. 134f, 256, 345 
allot: anweisen; zuweisen; *bescheiden 
allow time 
(See time.) 
alongside: bei 
(fin. H. 54, 141, 239, 329) 
the ‘already’: das Schon 
H. 327f 
ambiguous, ambiguity: *zweideutig, 
*Zweideutigkeit 
H. 134, 173-175 (Section 37); 177, 
180, 222, 253-255, 271, 298f, 
346, 378, 384 
tanalogy: *Analogie 
H. 3, 93 
analysis: *Analyse, *Auseinanderlegung 
Tanalysis sttus 
H. 112 


525 
analytic: * Analytik 
ancient ontology, etc. 
H. 3f, 19, 24-26, 44, 49, 154, 160, 
235, 403, 421, 437 
the ‘and-now-not-yet’: das “‘und jetzt 
noch nicht” 
(See now-not-yet.) 
animals 
H. 70, 246, 346 
(See also: animal ratione in Index of 
Latin Expressions.) 
tannounce: *melden 
(fin. FL 29) 
H. 8, 29-31, 72-75, 80, 96, 192, 252 
answerable: *verantwortlich 
H. 127, 288 
fanthropology: * Anthropologie 
(fin. H. 17) 
H. 16f; 45-50 (Section 10); 131, 183, 
190, 194, 199 n. vii, 200, 249 n. Vi, 
272, 272 n. vi, 290, 300 
anticipate: *vorlaufen; *vorgreifen; 
(fin. H. 262, 264, 302) 
*vorlaufen 
(df. H. 262-264, 309, 326, 336) 
H. 262-267, 301-305; 305-310 
(Section 62); 316-318, 322-326, 
331, 396, 339, 345, 350, 382-386, 


_ 390%, 424 
fantiquarian: *antiquarisch 
H. 396f, 400 
anxiety, be anxious: Angst, *sich 


ängsten 
(fin. H. 182, 277) 
(df. H. 182, 191, 251, 342-344) 
H. 140, 182-184; 184-191 (Section 
40); 192, 199, 235 n. vi, 251, 
254, 258, 265f, 276f, 296f, 301, 
305, oo 310, 322, 342-345 
readiness for anxiety : H. 382, 385, 391 
tapophantical: *apophantisch 
H. 33h, 155b, 433» 435 
the a ’: H. 158; 223 
appeal: "Anruf, *anrufen, berufen 
But cf. court of appeal (Instanz) 
li 269, 273) 
“anrufen: H. 269-280; 280- 
nn (Section 58); 292, 294-297, 


300, 307, 317 : 
appear, appearance: *erscheinen, 
Erscheinung 
But cf. outward appearance (Aus- 
sehen, 


(fin. H. 29) (df. H. 29-31) 
H. 23, 29-31, 35f, 78, 321, 436 


526 


tappercepion: *Aprmerzeption 
H. 319, 3:9 n. xvi 
tbe apprehensive: *befiirchien 
But cf. apprehend (erfassen) 
H. 57, 117, 142, 345 
appropriate (adj.): geeignet (suited, 
eic.); angemessen (proper; suit- 
ed; etc.); gemäss; -mässig 
But cf. inappropriate (ungeeignet, 


unangemessen, nicht zukom- 
men) 
(fin. H. 83) 
appropriate (verb) : *zueignen; 


aneignen (make one’s own) 


*zueignen: H. 69, 127, 148, 150f, 
160-162, 167-170, 196, 222, 231, 


‚296, 299 . 


a 
(See Index of Latin expressions.) 
arise: entspringen; entstehen (emerge; 
rise); etc. 
(fin. H. 347) 
arising and passing away: *entste- 
hen und vergehen 
H. 328, 330f, 333, 338, 420, 423, 


25, 43 
the “around”: *das Umherum 
H. 66 
taroundness: *das Umhafte 
(fin. H. 101) (df. H. 103) 
H. 66, 79 IOI, 103, 112 
tarrow: *Pfeil 
H. 78f 
tArticulation: *Artikulation 
(fin. H. 153) 
H. 3, 8, 54, 104, 111, 129, 149, 151, 
155-159, 161f, 165, 168, 201, 206, 
311, 335, 349, 362-364, 369, 
406, 408f, 416 
articulation: Gliederung 
(fin. H. 153) 
H. 153, ı6ıf, 166, 168f, 196, 200, 
234, 271, 317, 324f, 327, 351 
the ‘as’: das “Als”; the as-structure: 
die Als-Struktur 
But cf. the ‘just as’ (das “So-Wie”); 
Being as it is (Sosein) 
H. 149-151, 154, 1586, 223, 359f 
tthe ‘as-it-already-was’ : *das 
je schon war” 
H. 325f 
aspect: *Aspekt; *Aktionsart 
Aktionsart: H. 349 
fassail: *iiberfallen 
H. 70, 136, 195, 296, 328, 344, 355 


`, 
~ 


Being and Time 


assertion: Aussage, "aussagen 
(fin. H. 62, 149) {df. +I. 154-157) 
H. 4, 32, 36, 62, 133, 149, 153-160 
Section 33), 161-165, 189, 214, 
217f, 223-228, 273 
assign: verweisen; anweisen; zuweisen; 
angeben, Ang ra be 
(fin. H. 31, 68, 70, 84, 87, 408) 
verweisen 
(df. H. 68H, 77ff) 
H. 31, 68-71, 74f, 76-83 (Section 
17), 84, 86-88, riof, 117, 123, 
129, 149, 151, 158, 192, 210, 
250, 258, 2gof, 360 
(Note: this list also includes the more 
important passages in which ‘ver- 
weisen’ has been translated as 
‘refer’.) 
tangeben, Angabe: H. 408-410, 413, 
418, 422 
astronomical time-reckoning, etc. 
H. 371, 411, 418, 418 n. v 
tat home: *zuhause 
H. 188f, 276 
at the time: jeweilig 
But cf. time (Zeit, etc.) 
tatheoretical: *atheoretisch 
H. 59, 69, 358 
*attest: bezeugen 
H. 234f, 254, 258, 267-301 (II, III: 
ections 54-60), 302, 305f, 309 
attitude: Verhaltung; Einstellung; etc. 
tattunement: Gestimmtheit 
(fin. H. 134) 
H. 134, 137, 277, 335 
authentic: eigentlich 
(fin. H. 5, 42, 329) (df. H. 42f, 53) 
a. anxiety: 
a. orten of untruth: H. 299 
a. Being of Dasein: H. 44, 188, 191, 
322 
a. Being-come-to-an-end: H. 239 
a. Being-guilty: H. 291 
a. Being-one’s-Self: H. 129, 184, 269, 
268, 298 
a. Being-towards-death: H. 237, 260- 
267 (Section 53), 373 
. Being towards oneself: H. 122 
Being-a-whole: H. 267 
care: H. 122, 301, 323 
. certainty: H. 258, 308 
. coming towards: H. 330 
. constancy of the Self: H. 410 
. disclosedness: H. 221, 297, 325, 


331, 397 


pppp pn p m 


Index of English Expressions 


passim 

a. existentiell possibility: H. 193, 
267-270 (Section 54) 

a. face to face with thrownness: H. 


348 
a. “Tor-the-sake-of-which’”: H. 198 
a. future: H. 329f, 336-338, 348 
a. grasping of a sign: H. 79 
a. guilty: H. 287 
a. hearing the call: H. 294 
a. historicality : H. 382, 385-387, 390£ 


395f 
a. historiological: H. 395 
a. historizing: H. 7 385, 387 
a. history: H. 386 
a. maińtaining oneself in a prim- 
ordial possibility: H. 306 
a. making present: H. 410 
a. possibilities of existence: H. 383 
a. possibility which has been: H. 394 
a. potentiality-for-Being: H. 233- 
235, 266, ae) (TI, III) 922, 
339, 343f 
. potentiality-for - Being - one’s- Self: 
H. 175, 322f 
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole: H 
235, 266f, 301-333 (II, III), 372 
a. Present: H. 338 
a. readiness-to-hand: H. 69, 106 
a. repetition: H. 385 
resoluteness: H. 308, 310, 313, 382 
Self: H. 129f, 433 (Hegel) 
temporality: H. 327, 329, 331, 
338, 348, 375, 385, 414 
“there”: H. 328, 347 
time: H. 329 
transparency: H. 298 
truth of Dasein: H. 297, 302 
understanding: H. 146, 364, 279f, 
295, 302, 306, 3 348, 383, 425 
(Note: see also H. 184, 190, 233, 
259, 306, 350. See also ‘real’.) 
Durchschnitt, *durchsch- 
nittlich 
H. 43) 
. 4-6, 8, 16, 21, 43f, 50 n. x, 53, 66, 
71, 107, I2I, 127-129, 168-170, 
181, 188, 195, 232, 248, 254, 
272, 331, 370 383, 406, 410 
en “gewartig, *"gewärtigen 
(fin. H. 337, 347) 


a. 


(df: 


w 


527 
H. 337-339, er 7f, 350, 35$- 

356, 3 gah grt, 3906, 
406-410, Pieds 416, 4206, 
vernehmen, 


428 
aware: vertraut 
(See 


perceive.) 
Sag cf. unawares (unversthens). 


(See conscience.) 
bad mood: *Verstimmung 


(See mood.) 
mn A aaa Schukibegtet- 
Bat ft evenly ena (ebenmässig) 
242, 283, a 
base, basic, basıs nd: En 
Boden (soil, ground, etc.) ; Basis 
etc. 


(See also on the basis of.) 
tbefall: *vorfallen 
H. 158, 279, 284, 290 
fbe-fall, be-falling: *zu-fallen, *Zu-fall 
(fix. H. goo) 
H. 300, 410 
the ‘before’: das “Vor” 
(fin. H. 327) 
. 327f 
beginning: Anfang (outset, etc.) 
H. 233, 298, 373, 424 
behave, behaviour: verhalten; 
gebarden (H. 128) 
behold: anschauen; *schauen 

(See intuition.) 

Being: *Sein, Sein-, -sein 

(fin, A. 1, 4, 11, 212) 

(Note: except in a few cases which we 
shall list explicitly below, expressions 
beginning, or Ba with ‘be’, ‘being’, 

or ‘Being’ will be indexed according to 
their other components. Thus, for ‘be 
anxious’, see ‘anxiety’; for ‘Being- 
guilty’ A see ul ae for ‘spatial Being’, 
see ‘spatial so om. Gf. our 
remarks on Sein’ in the glossary. 
While the word ‘Being’ nears on 
nearly ¢, we shall content our- 
selves with fi isting here a few passages. 
which are particularly relevant to the 
problem of Being in general.) 

H, 1-15 (Int. I), 15-27 (Seeron 

6), 95) 37f, 54, 9a-94, 183, 1 
208, a12f, agof, 294, 241, 314, 


sich 


528 


27,19 


333, 349, 357, 366, 372, 392, 
419, 430f, 436-437 (Section 3) 
against one another: *Wider- 
einandersein 
H.12: 
tBeing alone: *Alleinsein 
H. 120f 
t Being alongside: *Sein bei 
(fin. H. 54, 141, 329) 
H. 54f, 107, 109, 119f, 131, 141, 146, 
148, 172, 181, 189, 192f, 196, 202, 
211, 220, 223, 238, 249f, 252, 263, 
298, 311, 317, 322, 326-328, 337, 
351-353» 363-365, 406-408, 413, 


419, 42 
tBeing alread: *Schon-sein 
H. 194, 365 
tBeing-already-alongside: *Schon-sein- 
bei 


(fin. H. 195) 
H. 61, 109, 277 
*Being-already-in: *Schon-sein-in 
(fin. H. 329) 
H. 192f, 195f, 202, 220, 249f,277, 317, 
327 
tBeing, among-one-another: *Ünter- 
einandersein 
H. 128 
tBeing as it is: *Sosein 
H. 5, 7, 14, 42 
*Being-the-basis: *Grundsein 
H. 282-285, 305 
tBeing for one another: *Für-einan- 
dersein 
H. 121 
Being-in: *In-Sein, *In-sein 
H. 41, 52-59 (Section 12), 105f, 119, 
123, 130-180 (I, V), 186, 18of, 
193, 200, 202, 297, 350 ` 
Being-in-itself,  Being-in-themselves: 
An-sich-sein; An-ihm-selbst-sein 


(H..go) 
(Note : see entry for ‘in itself’.) 


TBeing ‘in’ one another: *“In”- 
einandersein 
H. 54 
tBeing “in on it”with someone: *Mit- 
dabei-sein 
H. 174 


t ‘Being in something’: *““Sein in . 


- 54 
Being-in-the-world: *In-der-Welt-sein 
H. 13, 41, 52-62 (I, ID), 104-110 


Being and Time 


(Section 29), 119-180 (I, V), 
350-366 (Section 69), et passim 
Being-i 
(See Being-one’s-Self.) 
tBeing-on-the-scent: *Auf-der-Spur- 
sein 
H. 173 


tBeing-one’s-Self, Being-its-Self; *Sel- 
bstsein 


H. 41, 113-130 (I, IV—esp. 126-130, 
Section 27), 131, 146, 176, 184, 
263, 267f, 270, 284f, 298, 323 

(See a nn! 


tBeing out for... .: *Aussein auf... 
H. 195, 210, 261f 


tBeing-something: Etwas-Sein 
H. 160 


tBeing-there: *Da-sein 
But cf. Being there alongside: 
Dabeisein (239) 
(fin. H. 7) 
H. 55, 126, 132f, 134-140 (Section 
29), 142-148 (Section 31), 160- 
166 (Section 34), 189, 347, 350 
(See also no-longer-Being-there.) 
Being towards: *Sein zu 
(fin. H. 4, 234, 262) 
B. t. the beginning: H. 373 
B. t. the Dasein that has-been-there: 


H. 394 
B. t. death: H. 234, 235-267 (IL, D, 
gorf, 305-307, 309f, 329, 337 
344, 348f, 373f, 386, 390 
B. t. the end: H. 245, 247, 249-252, 
254, 255-260 (Section 52), 2: 
df., 265, 305, 317, 329, 372%, 
24 
. t. entities: H. 4, 121, 218, 222-225 
t. God: H. 10, 190 n. iv 
. t. oneself: H. 124f, 173, 177 
. t. Others: H. 124f, 17 
. t. possibilities: H. 148, 236, 26:- 
264, 329 
. t. one’s ownmost potentiality-for- 
Being: H. 188, igi df., ıgaf, 
195, 221, 255, 306, 325 
. t. the ready-to-hand: H. 298 
. t, the thing that itself has been un- 
covered: H. 256 
. t. a totality of involvements: H. 
150 
. t. ways of comporting oneself: H. 
21I 


W p g 


w o Wy 


Index of English Expressions 


. what is brought close: H. 106 
~ » 99 desevered: H. 106 

jj ' heard: H. 155 

i ” indicated: H. 82 

» » pointed out: H. 155 


177 
(See also H. 108, 125, 194). 
ace AAN R; *Was-sein 


42 
Being-with: *Mitsein, *Sein mit (H. 
263 only) 
H. 41, 113-130 (I, IV, esp. Sections 
26, 27), 131, 142, 146, 161-164, 
181, 193, 237-238, 250, 263-264, 
270-272, 280-293, 288, 298, 384, 
386, 406, 410 
belong: gehören; zugehören; hinge- 
hören; angehören, zukommen; 
eignen; etc. 
(fin. H. 163, 284, 325) 
H. 65, 68, 102f, 108, ı10f, 126, 163, 
242f, 246, 368, 378-381, et passim 
the “between”: das Zwischen, 
H. 55, 108, 132, 233, 3738, 390 
(See also the ‘in-between’. ) 
bewilder: verwirren 
H. 141, 341f, 344, et passim 
bind: verbinden; binden; verklam- 
mern; etc. 
judgment as binding together: H. 
32f, 159f, 319 
binding together of intentional acts: 


H. 49 
binding together of people devoted 
to the same affair: H. 122 
validity as universally binding, ete.: 
156, 278, 312-314, 362 
time as bound up with location: H. 
417 
et passim 
biography 
H. 16, 247, 361 
biology 
H. 10, 28, 45, 49f, 58, 237, 241, 246- 
249, 269, 275 
tbırth: *Geburt 
H. 233, 363f, 387, 390f, 394 
body: Leib (figure); Körper (corpor- 
eal); *Leibkörper; etc. 
H. 29, 48, 54, 56, 60, gı, g6f, 107f, 
117, 121, 147, 198, 346, 368, 416 


529 
botany 
H. 35, 46, 70 
breaks (in a referential context): 
Bruch 
H. 75f 
breaking a law 


(See law-breaking.) 
brightness: Helle (light), Helligkeit 
H.-28, 350, 412 
fbring about: zeitigen, *herbeiführen 
(fin. H..22, 304 
H. 22, 178, 261 
bring back: *zurückholen; *zurück- 
“ © bringen; *Rücknahme 
rer 
H. a ge 268, 271, 287, 289, 
296, 328, 338, 349 
snickbengen ia 
H. 271, 340, 343f, 346, 391 ` 
bring close: *nähern, *nahebringen. 
bring closer: *näherbringen 
Tbring forth: *hervorbringen; *vor- 
holen 
(fin. A. 29) 
H. 30, 339 a 
{bring to maturity: zeitigen 
(Jin. H. 122, 304) 
H. 122, 152 
burden: *Last; etc. 
H. 122, 127f, 194f, 268, 284, 299, 
345; 371 
“business of philosophers’: 
“Geschäft der Philosophen” 
(See philosophy.) 


tcalculate: *berechnen; *ausrechnen 
But cf. calculus (Rechnen) 
H. 102, 106, 111f, 258, 261, 294, 307, 
324, 418n. V; 420 
tcalender, calendrical: *Kalender, 
*kalendarisch 
H. 370, 376, 407, 411, 418 
call: *Ruf, *rufen; nennen; etc. 
(fr. H. 269, 273, 291) 
H. 269-272, 272-274 (Section 5 ); 
274-280 (Section 57), 281, 2 6- 
296, 300, 305, 307, 310 
call back: *Rückruf, *zurückrufen 
H. 277, 280, 287, 291, 294, 296 
call forth: *vorrufen 
H. 273f, 280, 287, 290f, 294, 300, 


305 
call to: anrufen, zurufen (See also 


appeal). 
H. 273, 288 


the das 


| 


530 
call— mi. 
call of conscience: *Gewissensruf, 
*Ruf des Gewissens 
H, 269-280, 288f, 307, 317 
I? calls: **es”” ruft, 
Te. 275-278 
care. *Sorge, "sorgen 
(Jin. A. 57, 121, 171) 
(df. 3?. 231, 249, 284f, 306, 316f, 329, 
335, 346, 350, 364, 374,. 406, 
436) 
H. 41, 57, 1211, 126, 191, 171-174, 
180-230 (I, V1), 231, 233, 235f, 
246, 249, 251f, 254, 259, 265, 
270, 274-280 (Section 57), 284- 
289, 298, 300, 310-333 (II, Til), 
334f, 337, 344, 346, 353f, 359, 
264, 367, 372, 374, 376, 382, 
385, 390, 397, 406, aif, 419, 
424, 436 
carry along: (See entry for ‘take along’ 
below.) 


carry away: entriicken 
(See rapture.) 

case of death: Todesfall 
(See death.) 

teatch up: *einholen; *aufholen 
H. 97, 126, 302, 307, 391 
(fin. H. 302) 

tcategory, categorial: 


(df. H. 448, 54 
H. 3, II, arf, 44f, 54-56, 63, 65, 68, 
71, 78, 88, 105, 1188, 135, 143, 
157 (categorical), 165, 188, 241, 
244n, ili, 318, 320 n. xix, 377, 
290f, 402f 
fcause, causation: *Ursache, *verur- 
sachen 
But cf. causality (Kausalitat— 320 n. 
xix), causal inference (Kaus- 
alschluss—204), plead its cause 
(verhandeln). 
H. in 246, 282-284, 352 
certain: 
(fin. H. 291) (df. H. 256) | 
H. 24, 136, 177, 255-258, 264-266, 
291-293, 302, 307f, 362, 435, et 
passim, w ; verändern; etc. 
H. 90-92, 97, 108, 114, 203f, 375, 389 
change over: *Umschla g, *umsch- 


* Kategorie, 


H. 134, 158, 238, 357, 360f, 364 
choice, choose: *Wahl, *wählen 


H. 7, 12, 21, 42, 188, 194, 264, 268, 


Being and Time 


270, 287f, 298, 371, 383-385, 391, 
394-396 
Christian theology and anthropology 
H. 48, igon, iv, 199 n. vii, 229, 249 
tchronology: *Chronologie 
H. 4:8 
circle: "Zirkel; Kreis 
H. 71, (5af 314f, 432 n. xxx 
Me *Umsicht 
ae . 65, 69, 123) 
H. 69, et passim 
circumstance: *Umstand 
But cf. factual circumstance (Sach- 
verhalt) 
H. 177, 300, 338, 379, 382, 384, 389 
clairvoyance 
(fin. H, 384) 
clear (verb), clearing (noun), cleared- 
ness: lichten, Lichtung, *Gel- 
ichtetheit 
(fin. H. 133) (df. H. 170, 350) 
H. 133, 170, 350f, 408 
But cf. clear away (lichten, wegräu- 
men), clear up (klären), clear 
(klar, deutlich, etc.) 
tclear vision: *hellsichtig 


m H. 384) 


H. 384. 
clock: *Uhr 
H. 7of, 376, 404, oar 420f 
close (adj.): nah 
(sin. H. 6, 102) 
(See glossary entries on 
“Nahe’.) 
close (verb): schliessen - 
(fin. H. 330) 
H. 114, 330 
tclose off, *verschliessen 
H. 23, 124, 132, 136, 141, 169f, 173, 
178, 184, 195, 222, 273, 276, 286, 
288, 300, 306 n. ii, 308, 311,399f, 
342, 347f, 425 
clue: Leitfaden 
co-: mit- 
cognition, cognize: Erkenntnis, 
erkennen 
But ¢f. take cognizance (Kenntnis 
nehnen, Kenntnis nahme) 
(fin. H. 25) 
(See know, knowledge.) 
come across: vorfinden, vorfindlich 
(fin. H. 135) 
*come along: ankommen, ankünftig 
H. 242, 254, 330, 341f, 382, 389, 
422f, 427 


‘nah’ and 


index of English Expressions 


come along—ont. 

(Note: this lest also includes the passages 
in which “ankonımen’ and ‘ankiinftig’, 
etc. have beer. translated as ‘come on’ 

or “onceming’.) 

come back. *zurückkommen 

(fin. H. 329, 383) 

H. 76, 284, 326, 339, 341, 343, 347f, 
360, 366, 368, 385, 391, 396, 409, 
422 

come before us: vorkommen 
(fin. H. 106) 
H. 106 

come down: überkommen, überliefern 
( ftn. H. 12, 383) 

tcome on: ankommen, ankiinftig 

(See ‘come along’.) 

Tcome to owe: schuldig werden 

(fin. H. 283, 287) 

H. 282, 286, 288 

tcome towards: zukommen, 
kunft, zukiinftig 

(fin. H. 325, 329) 

H. 325f, 320f, 336f, 341, 343, 347, 
365, 395 

common: gemein 

But cf. common sense. 

‘c.’ interest: H. 174 

c. reason: H. 4, 23 (Kant) 

c. understanding (Verstand): H. 
` 182, 334, 220 

‘c’ world: H. 64 

tcommon sense: *Verständigkeit 
H. 147, 260, 269, 288, 292-294, 296, 
299, 309, Zııf, 315, 329, 342, 
387f, 395, 406, 422 
communication: Mitteilung; 
munikation (H. 398f) 
(df. H. 155, 162, 168) 
H. 32, 155-157, 160, 162f, 168f, 224, 
272, 274, 363, 384 
compare, comparison: “vergleichen; 
abheben (contrast, bring out; 
etc.); zusammenstellen; etc. 
vergleichen: H. 52, 131, 166, 178, 
218, 399 
fcompetence: können (*potentiality; 
can; be able) 

H. 143 

comport: verhalten 
(Jin. H. 4, 124) 

tcompute: *errechnen: *rechnerisch 
H. 48, 105, 264, 388, 390 

conceal: verdecken, verhüllen 


Zu- 


*Kom- 


conceive, concept, conception: be- 
greifen, Begriff, Begrifflichkeit; 
etc. 


( jin. H. 150, 433) 

H 3f, 7 of, 32, 150, 157; 180, 310, 
349, 363, 393. 433-435 (Hegel), e: 
passım 

concern: besorgen 


(fin. A. 57) 
conclude: schliessen; abschliessen; etc. 
(fin. H. 75, 330) 
Tconcrete, concreteness: *konkret, 
*Konkretion . 
H. 1, 7, 9, ı8f, 26, 32, 34, 36, 39, 43, 
52, 78f, 82f, 129, 131, 133, 140, 
167, 178, 184, 187f, ıgıf, 194, 
209, 229-234, 251f, 255, 279, 300, 
302, 311, 335, 366, 382, 393-396, 
398, 399 n. Xiv, 431, 432 N. xxx, 


435 
confirm: *bewähren, verfestigen (H. 
100 
(df. H. 218) 
connectedness, 
menhang 
The c. of Dasein’s life from birth to 
death: H. 373-390 
(See also 351f, et passim, and entry for 
‘context’ .) 
conscience: *Gewissen 
(fin. H. 291) (df. H. 269, 271, 277, 
289, 300) er 
H. 234, 268-270, 270-272 (Section 
55), 272-274 (Section 56), 274- 
280 (Section 57), 286, 288, 
289-295 (Section 59), 295-301 
(Section 60), 307, 310f, 317, 372, 
385, 403 (Yorck) 
bad conscience: H. 279, 290-293 
call of conscience: 269-274 (Section 
56), 274-280 (Section 57), 288f, 
‚307, 317 
evil conscience: H. 209 
good conscience: H. 279, 281, 288, 
290-293 i | 
public conscience: H. 278,403 (Yorck) 
universal conscience: H. 278 
voice of conscience: H. 268f, 271, 
275, 278, 280, 290-292, 294, 300 
wanting to have a conscience: 
(df. H. 270, 289, 295f) 
H. 234, 270f, 288f, 292, 295f, 300, 
305, 307, 309f 
world conscience: H. 278 


connection: Zusam- 


532 


consciousness: Bewusstsein (mind H. 
50, 246) 
c. of God: H. 269 
c. of guilt: H. 281, 286 
c. of Reality: H. arf 
c. of truth: H. 216 
intentionality of c.: H. 363 n. xxiii 
reification of c.: H. 46, 114, 437 
transcending of c.: H. 201ff 
Dilthey: H. 205 n, xv, 209 
Hegel: H. 435, 437 
Husserl: H. 47 n. ii 
Kant: H. 203, 319 
Yorck: H. 401f 
See also H. 49, 62, 115, 218, 229, 
265, 278 
consider: besinnen; betrachten (ob- 
serve; study; contemplate H. 
213); ansprechen; etc. 
( fin. H. 15) 
considerateness: Rücksicht 
(fin. H. 123) 
H. 123, 125, 131, 146 
consist: bestehen; etc. 
(fin. H. 303) 
tconsole: *trösten 
H. 253f 
tconspicuous: *auffallig, *auffallend 
( fin. H. 74) 
H. 46, 71, 73-75, 80f, 104, 107, 111, 
121, 126, 157, 253, 274, 354f, 
O 


(Note: all references for ‘inconspicuous’ 

are included here.) 
constant: ständig; *konstant (H. 416) 

(Jin. H. 117, 128, 291, 303, 322, 332, 
375) . 

constancy, in-constancy, and non- 
Self-constancy of the Self: H. 
117, 322f, 332, 375, 390, 410 

Descartes on the constancy of corporeal 
Things, etc.: H. 92, 96 

& presence-at-hand: H. 96 

c. readiness-to-hand: H. 103 

the closest c. of Dasein: H. 128 

the primordial c. of existence: H. 340 

c. ahead-of-itself: H. 337 

c. Being-guilty: H. 305 

c. certainty: H. 308 

c. resoluteness: H. 391 

inconstancy, in-constancy: H. 128, 
336f, 390f 

ei passım 

Constitution: *Konstitution 
(fin. H. 8) 


Being and Time 


constitution, constitutive state: Verfas- 
sung 
(Jin. H. 8) 
constitute, constitutive, 
*konstituieren, *konstitutiv, 
*konstituens; Verfassungs—; 
ausmachen (make up, go to make 
up, etc.) 
construct, constructive, construe: *kon- 
struieren, *Konstruktion, *kon- 
struktiv; bauen; etc.) 
*konstruieren, *Konstruktion, *kon- 
struktiv; H. 11, 16, 28, 33, 36, 43, 
50 n. x, 61, 109, 197, 206, 260, 
302f, 375, 378, 399f, 427 N. xiii, 


constituent: 


435 
fconsume: *verzehren 
H. 431 
content: Bestand; *Gehalt; *Inhalt; 


ele. 
( fin. H. 303) 
context: Zusammenhang 
(See also connectedness.) 


tcontingency: *Kontingenz 


H. 143 

continue: *fortlaufen; *fortgehen; 
bleiben; etc. 

But cf. Continuity, Continuous: 


Kontinuität, kontinuierlich 
(fin. H. 423) 
H. 409f, 423 
fcontinuity, continuous: *Stetigkeit, 
"stetig 
(fin. H. 423) 
H. 423f 
fcontradiction, principle of: 
vom Widerspruch 
H. 226 
tconviction: *Überzeugung 
(Jin. H. 256) 
H. 116, 256 
tcopula: *Copula, *Kopula 
H. 159f, 349, 360 
tcorporeal-Thing: *Körperding 
H. 54, 56, 90-92, 97, 106f, 117, 238, 
361, 368 
tcorpse: *Leiche 
H. 238 
tcorruption: *Verderbnis 
H. 170f 
count: zählen (number H. 413); ete. 
H. 125, 420f 
(Note: other derivatives of ‘Zahl’ are 
usually translated in other ways.) 


*Satz 


Index of English Expressions 


counter-: Gegen- 
But cf. counter-thrust (Rückschlag); 
run. counter to (widerstreiten H. 


71). 
tthe ‘counter to’: *das “Gegen” 
H. 210 
course: Gang; *Lauf; *Ablauf, *ablau- 
fen; Verlauf, verlaufen; et. 
(fin. H. 243) 
course of time: *Lauf der Zeit (H. 
380, 422); *mit der Zeit (H. 
328) 
(See also run its course.) 
cover up: verdecken 
(df. H. 36) 
fcowardliness: *Feigheit 
H. 254, 266 
m *Gier 


H naa = 348) 


aa PEN critique: 
*Kritik 
critical epistemology ete. : H. 156, 206 
critical function of the conscience: H. 
279, 288, 290, 294 
Hartmann’ s critical realism: H. "208, 
n. xvi 
Nietzsche on critical historiology: H. 
396f 
et passim 
culture: *Kultur 
H. 21, 51f, 167, 176, 178, 379, 395f 
‘tcumulation: *Anhäufung 
H. 242, 328f 
fcuriosity: *Neugier 
346, 347) (df. H. 170, 172f, 
3 


4 
H. 134, 170-173 (Section 35), ı74f, 
1776, 180, 222, 271, 273, 277, 
310, 346-348 
current: jeweilig 


*kritisch, 


tdamage: *Beschädigung; *Schaden 
(H. 272, n. vi) 
H. 736, 354f 
Dasein: *Dasein 
(fin. H. 7, 25, 41. 58, 63, 184) 
(cf. H. 11f, 24, 42, 32, 54.575 65 E7 
113f, 119, 12i, 128f, 13%, el 
203, 210, 221, 231, 249f, 2598, 
a84f, 298, 323, 332, 381, 412, 
433, ei passim) 
Dasein-with: *Mitdasein 
H. 114, 116, 117-125 (Section 26), 
137, 140, 142, 162f, 168, 170, 


933 


176, 187, 193, 239, 272, 297 
tdating, datability: *datieren, *Datier- 
barkeit 
H. 407-418, 422-424, 427 
day: *Tag; etc. 
H. 71, 179, 370f, 409, 412f, 415 
dealings: *Umgang, umgehen 
(fin. H. 65, 66) 
H. 66-70, 79, 102, 104, ro6f, rar, 


149, 352-355; 358, 364, 412, 429 
death: *Tod , 


(df. H. 250, 258f} 
H. 104, 198, 233f, 237-241 (Sec- 
tion 47), 242, 246-249 (Section 
49), 249-252 (Section 50), 302, 
306-308, 311, 317, 329, 345; 
372-374, 382-387, 390, 4248 
Being towards death: (See Being 
towards.) 
tcase of death: *Todesfall 
H. 252-254, 257, as 
tfreedom for death: H. 384f 
tfreedom towards death: H. 266 
tthinking about death:_H. 254, 258, 
261, 3 
tdebt: Schuld 
H. 242, 281-283 
tthe deceased: *der Verstorbene 
H. 238f 
deception: Täuschung (delusion) 
H. 33, 38, 146, 169 
decide: *entscheiden, beschliessen (H. 
299) - 
(fin. H. 299, 309) 
H. 12, 42, 107, 127, 177, 223, 228, 
259, 268, 396 
tdeduce, deductive: *deduzieren, 
*deduktiv; schliessen (H. 4) 
H. 8, 11, 36, 182, 242, 289, 301, 314, 
340, 367, 377 
tdeficient: *defizient 
( fin. H. 20) 
H. 20, 57, 61, 75, 104, 120f, 123-125, 
336, 352, 355 | 
define, definition: bestimmen; umgren- 
zen (delimit, ef.); “Definition, 
*definieren; ek. 
definite character 
(See give a definite character.) 
deformalize: *entformalisieren 
H. 35, 241 | 
deliberation: *Überlegung 
H. 187, 359-361 
tdeliver over: *überantworten 
(fin. H. 21) 


534 


deliver over-—cont. 
H. 21, 42, 134f, 144, 148, 167, 173, 
188f, 192, 
284, 364, 383, 996 
tdelusion: Täuschung (deception) 
H. 62, 138, 274 
tdemise: *Ableben 


(fin. H. 247) 
H. 247, 251, 254, 257-259, 261 
demonstrate: *ausweisen; erweisen 


(prove, turn out); nachweisen; 
demonstrieren (illustrate) 


(fin. H. 53). 
depersonalization: 


rung 


* Entpersonalisic- 


H. 48 
tdepression: *Gedrücktheit 
H. 342 
tdeprive of its character as present: 
*Entgegenwartigung 
H. 391, 397 
tdeprive of its theological character: 
*enttheologisieren 


H. 49 
tdeprive of its worldhood: *Entwelt- 
lichung 

H. 65, 75, ı12f, derive, derivation, de- 
derivation: *abkünftig; *ablei- 
ten, *abgeleitet; *Derivat, * Der- 
ivation; Herkunft (origin); etc. 

(fin. H. 329) 

d. character of assertion: H. 133, 153- 
160 (Section. 33) 

d. sense of ‘certainty’ : 256 

d. conception of guilt: H. 287 

d. conception of time: H. 326, 329-331 

d. conception of truth; H. 214, 219-226 
(Section 44b), 256 

d. kinds of understanding: H. 143, 147, 
152, 160 

underived character of Being: H. 4, 8 

underived character of care: H. 182, 318 

history as derivation (Herkunft) from 
the past: H. 378 

ei passim 

tdesever: entfernen 

(fin. H. 105) (df. H. 105) 

H. 27, 103, 105-111, 120, 132, 136, 
147, 167, 172, 279, 293, 209, 
335, 361, 368f, 370, 396 

(Note: this list also includes all the 
passages in which ‘ent-fernen” has 
been translated as ‘de-sever’ etc., or in 
which ‘entfernen’ has been translated 
as ‘remove’, etc, 


z51f, 254, 259, 276, 


Being and Time 


tde-sever: *ent-fernen 
(See entry for ‘desever.’) 
tdesperation: *Verzweiflung 
H. 229, 345 
tdestiny: Geschick 
But Eh destine (bestimmen, H. 15, 


44) - 
(fin. H. 384) (df. H. 384) 
H. 56, 384-386, 394 r 
fdestruction, destroy: *Destruktion, 
*destruieren; *zerstören (H. 152) 
H. 19-27 (Section 6), 31, 39, 89, 392 
t Determine:; *determinieren 
H. 241, 298, 362, 368 
determine: bestimmen 
(fin. H. 344) 
aina: * Abträglichkeit 
H. 83, 140f, 144, 185f, 341 
devote, devotedness: *hingeben, 
*Hingabe; ete. 
t*hingeben, *Hingabe: H. 136, 199, 
347, 354 
tdiaeresis: * Diairesis 
H. 159 
+dialectic: * Dialektik 
H. 22, 25, 215, 229, 286, 301, 4291, 
432, 432 N. XXX 
die: *sterben 
(df. H. 247, 251) 
H. 238-241, 245, 247-255, 257, 
259 
t‘one dies’: “man stirbt’ 
_ H. 253-255 
tdie away: *absterben; *ersterben 
H. 173f 
differentiate: unterscheiden; 
enzieren, *Differenz 
But cf. undifferentiated, without 
difterentiation (indifferent) (Sze 
entry for ‘Indtfferent’.) 
(Jin. H. 429) 
unterscheiden: H. 429f, 433-435 
tdifferenzieren, *Differenz: H. 43, 
50, 77, 119, 324, 396, 399f, 403 
tdim ao *abblenden 
H. 138, 155, 189, 195, 265 
dimension: *Dimension 
H. 103, 110, 112, et passim 
direct (adj.): *direkt; ek. 
direct (verb): richten; ausrichten 
(fin. H. 102) 
richten: H. 62, 137, 181, 287, 411 
et passim 
ausrichten: H. 79, 108-110, 368 


*differ- 


Index of English Expressions 


direction: Richtung; ete. 
( Per 102) 
H. 71, 79, 102f, 108-111, et passim 
fdirectional, directionality: ausgerich- 
` tet, Ausrichtung | 
( Jin. H. 02) 
H. 79, 102, 105, 108-111, 120, 132, 
157, 299, 335, 368f 
iu ice verschwinden (vanish) 
« 105, 244f, 251, 342, 357, 375, 379 


39 ur 
tdisavowal: *Widerruf 
( fin. H. 386) 
H. 386 
tdisburden: *entlasten 
disclose: terschliessen 
(fin. H, 75, 151, 297, 298, 300, 315) 
(df. H. 75, 175, 189, 220, 269, 334f) 
(See Sections 44, 68, ef passim.) 
discourse: Rede, reden 
(fin. H. 25, 160) (df. H. 32, 161f) 
H. 25, 32, 34, 133f, 160-167 (Section 
34), 168f, 173f, 180, 187f, 220, 
323, 269-273, 277, 295f, 335, 
346, 349f (Section 68d), 406- 
408, 416, 425 
(Note: this list includes the more im- 
portant passages in which the 
alternative translation ‘talk? has 
been used,) 
discover: entdecken 
(fin. H. 33) 
(Note: see also ‘uncover’.) 
discriminate; unterscheiden; 
rimen 
(fin. H. 429) 
discuss: *besprechen; erörtern; *Dis- 
kussion, *diskutieren; etc. ad- 
dressing and discussing: ans- 
prechen und besprechen 
(fin. H. 34) 
H. 25, 34, 44f, 59, 62, 406, 408 
tdisguise: verstellen 
H. 35f, 58, 124f, 129, 132, 175, 191, 
222, 274, 295, 302, 326 
tdisperse: zerstreuen 
H. 56, 67, 129, 172, 273, 310, 338, 
347, 371, 389f 
(Note: this list also includes all passages 
in which ‘zerstreuen’ is translated as 
‘dtstract’.) 
tdissect: *zergliedern 
H. 178, 209, 273 
tdistance, distant: *Abstand 


* Disk- 


535 

But cf. distance-senses (Fernsinne 
H. 109). 
(fin. H. 105) 

H. 102, 105-108, 122, 126, 269, 361, 


369, 381 
Tdistantial, distantiality *abstandmas- 
sig, *Abstandigkeit 

H. 107, 126-128 

distinctive: ausgezeichnet, auazeichnen 
(special; distinguish ; etc.) 

But ¢f. distinguish (abgrenzen, aus- 
zeichnen, scheiden, trennen); 
distinct (verschieden, deutli 
Unterschied); distinction (Ab- 
gren zung, Unterschied, schei- 
den). 

distract: zerstreuen 

(Note: see entry for ‘disperse’ .) 

tdivert: verlegen 

H. 146, 165, 201, 206, 222, 259 

tdownward plunge: * Absturz 

H. 178 

tdread: *Grauen 
(fin. H. 182; cf. H. 190 n. iv.) 
H, 142 
tdrıve aa Trieb 
H. 194, 210f 
tdue on account: 
haben 
H. 281 
tdumb: *stumm 

H. 164, 296 

tduration: *Dauer 

H. 106, 432-3 n. xx 

the ‘during’: das “während” 

But cf. endure (*währen, 

duration (*Dauer). 
409 (Cf. also H. 413.) 


*etwas am Brett 


etc.) ; 


raat dwelling: aufhalten, Aufenthalt 


(in. H. 61) 

H. 54, 61-63, 69, 75, 80, 85, 107, 119, 
124, 164, 173, 189, 261, 347, 
352, 388, 422 


easy: leicht 
Ge = 360) 


Beets Paid: *Ekstase, *ekstatisch 
(fin. H. 329, 338) (df. H. 329, 365) 
H. 329-331, 337, passim 

telate: heben (raise, etc.) ° 
H. 134f, 345 

element: *Element; etc. 

H. 46, 181, 196, 334, 403 
elemental; *elementar 


536 


femanate: ausstrahlen (radiate) 
H. 30, 140, 350 
(Note: this list includes all passages in 
. which ‘ausstrahlen’ appears.) 
tempathy: *Einfühlung 
H. 124f 
fempirical: *empirisch 
H. 30% 50, 162, 229, 257f, 269, 321, 


367 
empty: leer (vacuity, H. 60) 
encounter: *begegnen 
( fin. H. 31, 44, 329) 
end: Ende, enden 
H. 233-238, 241-246 (Section 48), 
249f, 259, 264, 305, 329, 373f, 
424, 426 
Being-at-an-end: *Zu-Ende-sein 
(fin. H. 234) 
H. 234, 237, 245f, 305 
Being towards the end: *Sein-zum- 
Ende 
(See Being towards.) 
fcome to an end: *Zu-Ende-kommen 
H. 238-242 
endless: "endlos 
H. 330f, 348, 384, 424, 426 
fendanger: *gefahrden 
H. 141, 282, 356 
fendure: *währen; *fortwahrend ; *im- 
merwährend 
But cf. duration (*Dauer); 
‘during’ (*das ‘“‘wahrend’’) 
H. 96, 128, 409 
tentangle: *verfangen, *verfanglich 
But cf. disentangle (auswickeln, H. 
241; entwirren) 
H. 67, 173, 178, 180, 346-348 
tenter into: *hereinstehen 
But cf. the transifive verbr ‘enter’ (‘kom- 
men in...) 
H. 152, 248, 255, 258, 302 
entity: Seiendes; seiend (H. 130) 
(fin. A. 1, 3, 7, 11) 
environment: *Umwelt 
(fin. H. 65) 
H. 57f, 66-88 (I, III A), 89, 101-113 
(I, III C), et passim 
fenvisage: *vergegenwärtigen . 
(fin. H. 359) 
H. 34, 55, 248, 303, 359, 393 | 
tepistemology: Erkenntnistheorie 
H. 10, 59, 156, 183, 206-210, 213- 
216, 375, 401 
(Note: this list includes all passages in 
which ‘Erkenninistheorte’ has been 


the 


Being and Time 


translated as ‘theory of knowledge’. 
See also ‘cognition’, ‘know.’) 
fequality: Gleichheit (sameness, H. 
8 


11 
But cf. equiprimordial, with equal 
primordiality (gleichursprüng- 
lich) 
H. 216, 434 
tequanimity: *Gleichmut 
(fin. H. 134) 
H. 134, 345 
equipment, item of equipment: *Zeug 
( fin. H. 68, 74) 
H. 68ff, et passim 
equiprimordial, with equal primordi- 
ality: *gleichursprünglich 
TEssence: *Essenz 
(fin. H. 117) 
H. 117, 233, 318 
essence, essential: Wesen, *wesenhaft, 
*wesentlich 
(fin. H. 117) 
H. 12, 42, 48f, 214, 231, 298, et passım 
tEssertial: *essentie 
( fin. H. 117) 
H. 117 
festablishing of signs: *Zeichenstiftung 
H. 8of 
estimation: schätzen (esteem, assess); 
abschätzen (assess) 
H. 105f, 369 
teternal, eternity: *ewig, *Ewigkeit 
H. 13, 106, 227, 229, 338 n. ili, 371, 
423, 437 n. xiii, 341 
*ethics: * Ethik 
H. 16, 291 n. viii (Scheler), 294, 316, 
320f n. xix (Scheler), 402 
( Yorck) 
ethnology 
H. 51, 51 ftn. xi, 247 
(See also culture, primitive.) 
teudaemonism: *Eudaimonismus 
H. 293 
tevade: ausweichen (give way, H. 78f) 
H. 93f, 135f, 139, 213, 254-260, 264, 
322, 342f, 371, 391, 425 
tevent: *Begebenheit; *Ereignis 
*Begebenheit: H. 240, 277, 280, 310, 
379, 384, 395, 410f 
*Ereignis: H. 152, 250, 2531, 257, 
273, 284, 290, 378f, 382, 389 
everyday, everydayness: *alltäglich, 
* Alltäglichkeit; *Alltag (H. 258, 


345, 370 
But cf. every day (alle Tage, H. 370) 


Index of English Expresstons 


everyday-—cont. 
(fin. H. 16) (df. H. 43f, 181, 332, 
370-372) 
H. 16f, 43f, 50f, 117-125 (Section 26), 
126-130 (Section 27), 166-180 
(I, V B), 181, 233-235, 252-255 
(Section 51), 255-260 (Section 
52), 332-335, 370-372 (Section 
71), et passim 
tEveryman: *jedermann 
H. 362, 370, 411, 413, 416 
everyone: *jedermann; etc. 
H. 413, 417, 425 
teverywhere and nowhere: 
und nirgends 
H. 173, 177, 347 
tevil (noun): *Ubel 
H. 141, 248, 341f 
tevil (adj.): *böse 
H. 286f, 290f 


*überall 


texact (verb): zumuten (impose upon, ` 


H. 39); *sich rächen (exact a 
penalty, H. 174) 
H. 266, 285, 305, 307-310, 322 
exhibit: aufweisen; aufzeigen; heraus- 
stellen (set forth, etc.) 
(fin. H. 34, 53) 
exist, existence, existent: 
*Existenz, *existent 
(fin..H. 303, 329) (df. H. 12f, 42, 53, 
231-233, 313f, etc.) 
existential, existentiality: "existenzial 
(adj.), *Existenzialitat 
(fin. H. 12) (df. H. 12, 327) 
H. 12f, 16, 20, 38, 41, etc. and Sections 
II, 25, 29-34, 42, 45, 49» 59 52, 
53, 59, 60, 67, 72, 76, 82, 83, 
et passim 
*exisientiale: *Existenzial (noun) 
(df. H. 44) 
H. 44f, 54-57, 64, 105, 111, 121, 120f, 
134, 143f, 148, 150f, 160, 165, 
199f, 226, 242, 297, 311, 336 
existentiell: *existenziell 
(fin. H. 12) (df. H. 12) 
Sections 54, 62, et passim 
fexpect: "erwarten 
(df. H. 262, 337) 
H. 119, 156, 195, 205, 246, 248, 261f, 
274f, 294, 337, 339; 341-343» 
345, 353, 355 
tExperience: *erleben, *Erlebnis 
(fin. H. 46) 
H. 46-49, 114, 119, 130, 136, 181, 
194, 214, 247, 251, 265, 269, 


*existieren, 


537 


279, 290-293, 340, 355» 
3736, 387f, 390f, 400 
experience: erfahren 

(in. H. 46) 

explain: erklären (declare, etc); ex- 
plizieren, Explikation (expli- 
cate); deuten (point to); etc. 
deuten 
(fin. H. 87) 
erklären 
(df. H. 336) 
explicit: *ausdrücklich; *explizit 
(fin. H. 149) 
expres, expression: *ausdrücken, 
* Ausdruck; aussprechen; ete. 

(fin. H. 149, 167, 224, 408) 

aussprechen: 

H. 149, 155, 161-165, 167f, 223-225, 
271, 406-411, 414, 417, 4218, 
et passim 

textend, extension: ausdehnen, Aus- 
dehnung (a high degree, H. 
195); sich erstrecken 
But cf. extensive (weitgehend, 
weitlaufig); extent (Weite, 
Reichweite, Tragweite, inwie- 
weit, inwiefern, sofern, etc.) 

ausdehnen, Ausdenhnung: H. 54, 
68, 90, 101, 112, 368, 427 n. xv 

tsich erstrecken: H. 173, 188, 239 

texternal world: *Aussenwelt 

H. 201, 202-208 (Section 43a), 211, 


273 


344> 


face to face with: vor (with accusative) ; 
. das Wovor 
(But cf. in the face of (vor, with 
. dative) 
(fin. H. 184, 327) 
H. 184, 188, 224, 227, 255, 265f, 276, 
288 


Fact: *Faktum 

( fin. H. 56) 

H. 5, 18, 56, 66, 79, 148, 152, 168, 
179, 190, 225, 254, 268f, 276, 
287, 328, 371, 382, 387, 392f, 428 

fact: *Tatsache; ete. ° 

(fin, H. 56) 

*Tatsache: H. 56, 179, 229, 254, 
257f, 268f, 290, 293, 328, 362, 
394f, 398, 404, et passim 

- (Note: the word ‘fact’ has been used 
informally in translating several 
other expressions. Our list of passages 
is by no means complete, but 


538 


fact—cont. . 
includes only some in which it ts 
perhaps of particular interest that the 
word ‘Tatsache’ has been used.) 
factical :*faktisch 

(fin. H. 7, 56) 

(H. 145f, 179, 192, 221, 229, 2515 
256f, 259f, 269f, 266, 269, 276, 
et passim 

tfacticity: *Faktizitat 

(fin. H. 7, 56, 135) 

H. 56, 59, 72 n. i, 120, 128, 135, 145, 
179, 181, 190-193, 222, 229, 231, 
250, 252, 275f, 284, 298, 314, 
‚816, 328, 348, 350, 404 

factual, factuality: *tatsächlich, *Tat- 
sächlichkeit 

But cf. factual circumstance (Sach- 
verhalt, H. 264f) ; factual science 
(Tatsachenwissenschaft, H, 362) 

(fin. H. 7, 56, 195) (df. H. 56, 394) 

H. 56, 135, 276, 315, 394, et passim 

fail to hear: *überhören 

(fin. H. 271) 

H. 271, 279f, 296 

failure to stand by itself: *Unselb- 
ständigkeit 

(fin. A. 117, 322). 

H. 117, 128 

tfaith; *Glaube, glauben, (think; be- 
lieve, ete, } 

H. 10, 180, 190 n. iv, 205f 

fall: verfallen (deteriorate, H. 22, 36); 
fallen; Verfall (H. 378) 

But cf. fall short (zurückbleiben; 
nicht ing Ziel bringen). 

(fin, H. a1, 194, 175, 300, 428) (df. 
H. 175! » 254, 346f, 369) 

verfallen: H „ar, 134f, 139, 166-180 
(I, V B; esp. Section 38); 346- 

ai 349 (Section ee et passim 

allen: I 05, 428, 6 

false: *falsch 34 405, 420, 433-43 
But cf. falsify (verfälschen) 
H. 33, 215, 226f,.393 
familiar: vertraut; hekannt 
known; ‘acquaintance) 
tfarnes: Ferne 

( fin, H. 105) 

H. 105, 107f, 140, 172 

(Note: this includes all passages in 
which ‘Ferne’ occurs.) 

tfascinated: *benommen 

(fin. H. 344) 

H. 61, 76, 113, 176, 271, 344) 


(well 


Being and Time 


tfate, *Schicksal 
But çf. fatal (fatal, H. 368) 
(fin. H. 384) (df. H. 385, 386) 
H. 166, 384-392, 394f, 410, 435 
tfear: *Furcht, *fürchten 
(fin. H. 141) (df. H. 140ff, 189, 
342, 344f 
H. 133, 140-142 (Section 30), 182, 
185f, 189, 190 n. iv, 251, 254, 
266, 341-345 
tfear about: *fürchten um 
H. 141f, 341 
tfear for: *fürchten für 


4if. 
tfearful: *furchsam 5. 
H. 1418, 345 
tfearlessness: *Furchtlosigkeit 
H. 137 
tfearsome: *furchtbar 
H. 140-142, 185f ` 
tfeeling: *Gefühl 
But cf. feel (fühlen) ; feel by touch 
(tasten, betasten) 
H. 109, 138f, 142, 249 n. vi, 271, 
342, 400 (Yorck) 
tfill in: erfüllen 
(fin. H. 151) 
H. 151, 192, 320 n. xix, 326, 343 
tfill up: *auffüllen (242f, 374); *aus- 
füllen (103, 368) 
find oneself: sich finden, sich befinden, 
Befindlichkeit (H. 328) 
(fin. H. 134, 135, 137, 328) 
sich finden: H. 119, 128f, 135, 144, 
268, 271, 328, 340 
sich befinden: H. 135, 180, 188, 340, 
346 
(Note: the verb ‘find’ has been used 
informally to translate ‘finden’ and 
many other expressions, of which the- 
most important ts ‘befindlich’—‘to 
be found’.) 
tfinite: “endlich 
H. 93, 264, 329-331, 948, 384-386, 
413, 424f 
tfirst instance: See in the first instance. 
tflee: *fliehen, *Flucht; flüchtig (fleet- 
ing, fugitive) 
(Jin. H. 184) 
H. 44, 134f, 184-186, 189, ıg2f, 251- 
255, 258-260, "276, 278, 310, 
322, 340, 348, 390, 425 
(Note: this list also includes the passages 
in which ‘flüchtig’ is translated as 


fleeting’ or ‘fugitive’.) 


Index of English Expressions 


fleeting :: Sflüchti 
(See flees). 
for the-most part: zumeist | 
(Jin. H 16) (df. H. 370) 
the “for-thie-sake-of-which”: das Wor- 
he 
H. 84,.86-88, 111, 
145-147, 181, 191-194, 228, 
2 ee Sore ae ae 32% 337, 347; 


(Note: is list also includes all the chief 
in which tiwi’ is 
seanilated as as ‘for the sake of?.). 
the “for-which”: das Wofür (ŒH. 83f); 
oe (H. 414) 
(fin. H. 414) 
dincbearaner, *Nachsicht 
(fin. H. 123) 
H. 123 
tfore-conception: Vorgriff 
( fin. H. 150, 327) 
H. 1508, 153, 157, 232, 311 
(Note: this list also incl ludes all passages 
in which ‘Vorgriff’ is translated as 
‘something we grasp in advance’.) 
Jore having: Vorhabe 
fn. A. 150, 327) 
H. 150f, 153, 157f, 232-234, 296, 268, 
290, 311, 316, 323, 372 
(Note: this list also includes all passages 
in which ‘Vorhabe' is translated as 
‘something we have tn advance’.) 
tfore-sight: Vorsicht 
(fin. H. 150, 527) 

H. 80, 150f, 153, 156-158, 232f, 267, 
311, 
(Note: a list also includes all passages 
in which ‘vorsichtig’ occurs, and all 
those in which ‘Vorsicht ts trans- 
lated. as ‘something we see in 

advances’ 


tfore-structure: *Vor-Struktur 

(fin. H. 927) 

H. 151-158 
forget: “vergessen 

(af. H. 219, 339) 

H. 44, 62, 219, 262, 277, 292, 322, 
339, 341-345, 3478, 350. 354, 
369, 388, 391, 406f, goof, 4245, 
et passim 
*Form; *ausformen: 
(H. 158, 169) ; etc. 

H. 31, 78, 103, 111, 156, 169, 315, 
366f, 400, et passim 


form: C-astalt 


.129, 129, 143, i 


539 


(Note : the word ‘form’ has been used freely 
in translating many other expressions. 
formal: *formal 
(Note: in Heidegger's usage this word is 
to be thought of as roughly synony- 
mous with ‘empty’ and ‘abstract’. 
Its opposite is ‘concrete’, not in- 
formal’. Cf. H. 7, 27, 88, 147, 
159, 241, 248, 255, 277, 435» 
assim. ) 


ei p . 
formalism: *Formalismus 
H. 9, 400 
tformalize: *formalisieren 
H. 22, 77h 88, 147, 159, 208, 283, 
432f 
(Note: see also “deformalize’.) 
former occasion: See on that former 
occasion, 
forward: vor-; etc. 
(fin. H. 291) 
forthwith; sogleich; sofort 
H. 407, 421%, 424 
found, F andation: *fundieren; 
*Fundament; *fundamentieren; 
*Grundlagenkrisis (H, 9) 
But cf. fundamental fundamental) 
( fin. H. 34, 69) 
sang 13 T 59-62), ‘i (H. 92- 
95), 444 214-219), et passim 
free (adj.), freedom: frei, *Freiheit; 
= (angstlos, H. 258; sorglos, 
H. 57, 192, 294) 
.df. H. 285, 366, 384) 
f. for authenticity or inauthenticity: 
H. 188, 191, 195» 232, 344 
f. for Being-guilty H. 288 
f. for the call of le: H, 287 
f. for care: H. 122 
f. for death: H. 264, 266, 984f 
f. for freedom of choice: H. 188 
f. for oneself: H. 122 
f. for possibilities: H. 191, 193, 199, 
264, 285, 312, 344 
f. for one’s ownmost potentiality-for- 
Being: H. 144, 191 ` 
f. for rep.tition : H, 385 
free (verb) : *freigeben, *Freigabe 
(fin. H. 83) 
H. 83-86, 104, 110f, 118, 190-129, 
12G, 141, 144, 227, 264, 2971, 
510, 313, 343, 363 
Be freischwebend (soaring, 
9) 
H. 1g, 28, 36, 123, 144, 156, 272, 276, 
279, 298, 309, 325, 339, 388, 424 


in 


540 Being and Time 


.) 
fulfill: vollenden (complete); erfüllen; 
genügen (H. 31) 
{ fin. H. 244) 
244f 


le se Funktion; fungieren; etc. 


f. analysis: H. 39, 41, 131, 181, 184, 
213, 230, 231-235 (Section 45), 


3 
f. ontology: H. ı3f, 37, 131, 154, 
182f, 194, 196, 200-202, 213, 
232, 268, 301, 310, 316, 377, 
403, 405f, 436-437 (Section 83) 
Tfurther retelling: *weitersagen 
H. 155, 169, 277 
tfuture, futural: *Zukunft, zukünftig 
( fin. H. 325, 329) (df. H. 325) 
20, 141, 325-330, 336-348, 350, 
360, 365, 378, 381, 385-387, 391, 
395-397, 410, 423-427, 431 


gen *Generation 
H. 20, 385, 385 n. viii 
tgenesis: * 


H. 171, 357f, 360-362, 3 
_ 420-428 (Secti ne 1) 
genuine: *echt ; *gen 
(fin. H. 5), (ar. G H. 142, 146) 
tgenus, generic: *Gattung 
H. 3, 14, 38, 42, = 128, 433 (Hegel) 
give a definite aa bestimmen 
H. 154-8, 162 
fgive oneself airs: *sich aufspreizen 


(fin. H. 430f, 434 
tgive = ae: 


eration: 


392, 406, 


*zu verstehen 


H. 148, 267, 269-271, 279f, 287, 296 
given: gegeben 
H. 36, 115f, 129, 265, et passim 
go to make up: See make up 
God: H. 10, 24, 28, 48f, 49 nn. vii, ix; 
g2f, 95, 190 n, iv, 199, 269, 275, 
291, 427 n. xiii 
(Note: see also ‘theology’.) 
good: *gut; Dutzendware (H. 71) 
H. 29, 99, 199, 279, 281, 286, 288, 
_ 290-293, 383 
fgossip: *nachreden 
H. 168f 


fgrammar: *Grammatik 


H. 165 
grasp: fassen (take, et.); erfassen 
(*apprehend; comprehension, 


H. 49); greifen; etc. 
grasp in advance: *Vorgriff 
(fin. H. 150) 
(Note: see fore-conception.) 
Greeks 
H. 25f, 33f, 39, 68, 165, 170f, 222, 
225, 358, 378 
ground (verb): gründen (base, basis); 
begründen (establish, etc.); etc. 
ground (noun): Grund (basis, reason, 
bottom, et.); Boden (basis, 
soil, footing, etc.) ; etc. 
H. 32, 34f, 152, ef passim 
groundless: *bodenlos 
H. 168-170, 177f, ef passim 
Tguilt, guilty: Schuld, schuldig 
(fin. H. 280, 281, 287) (df. H. 281- 


83, 286, 305f) 

H. 260 279, 280-289 (Section 58), 
290-293, 295-297, 301, 305-307, 
306 n. ii, 311, 317, 325, 372, 
382, 385 


thammer: *Hammer 

H. 6of, 78, 83f, 109, 154f, 157, 360f 
hand down: überliefern 

(fir. H. 21, 383) 

H. 21, 166, 379, 383-387, 390f, 395 
handle: *handhaben; handeln; be- 

handeln (H. 34) 
*handhaben: H. 109, 353, 355, 360, 


368f 
thandy: handlich 
H. 73, 414, 418 
thanker: *nachhängen 
H. 195 
happen: geschehen; *Rückzeichen (H. 
78, 80) 
(fin. H. 19) 
. 330, 376, 388 n., ix, 389, 395, 404, 
426, et passim 
(See also ‘historize’.) 
hard, hardness: *hart, *Härte; *ersch- 


have been, having been: 
*Gewesenheit; etc. 
(fin. H. 326) 
H. 326-329, 340-346, 348, 350, 360, 
365, 381, 385-387, 391, 395, 427 


gewesen, 


ont: 


* ` 


Index of English Expressions 
the “here”: sy Hier 


have been—cont. 
thave-been-there: *da-gewesen 
H. 380f, 385f, 393-397 
thaving-been-in-the-world: *In-der- 
Welt-gewesen-sein 
H. 394 
tbe-as-having-been: gewesen sein, 
Gewesensein 


H. 326, 328, 339f, 344f 


tin the process of having peen: 
esend 
( fin. H. 326) 


H. 326, 350, 385, 391, 96, 410 
thave before a Vorhaben ee: 
H. 149, 260, 279, goo 
have a conscience: Sze conscience. 
fhave debts: *Schulden haben 
H. 281-283 
thave due on account: 
Brett haben 
H. 281 
‘have’ an environment: H. 57f 
‘have’ a history: H. 378, 382, 417 
have in advance: See fore-having. 
thave meaning: *Sinn haben 
H. 151, 154, 324, 361 
have a mood: See mood. 
thaving presence: *anwesend 
( fin. H. 326) 
H. 326, 346, 359, 369, 389, 417, 423 
thave responsibility: *Schuld haben 
H. 282 
have something: Haben von etwas 
H. 351 
have time: See time 
have to be: zu sein haben 
H. 12, 134 
have to do: *zu tun haben 
H. 48, 56, 61, 79, 125, 149, 158, 160, 
172, 351 
thaving the ‘world’: die “Welt” haben 
H. 58 
hear: "hören 
(fin. H. 164, 271, 284) 
H. 93, 107, 155, 161, 163-165, 168, 


*etwas am 


174, 269, 271, 273-275, 277; 
279-281, 284, 287, 292, 294- 
i 296 
thearken: *horchen 
H. ı63f 


thearsay: *Hörensagen 


H. 155, 169, 173, 224 
heavy: schwer 


( fin. H. 360) 
H. 154, 157, 360f 


541 
(df. H. 3 


H. 107 9), 132, 18 „417 
theritage: *Erbe, * L 


H. 383-386, 390f i 
thermeneutic, hermeneutical: *Her- 
meneutik, *hermeneutisch 
(df. H. 37f; 398 (Dilthey)) 
h. of Being with one another: H. 138 
h. of Dasein: H. 37f,-436 
h. of Dasein’s facticity: H. 72 n. i 
h. of empathy H. 125 
h. of the Adyos H. 25 
Po hermeneutics: H. 3 
ermencutical “‘as”: FL. 158f, a 
h. discussion of the Cartesian onto- 
logy of the ‘world’: H. 89, 95- 
101 (Section 21 
h. conditions etc.: H. 272 n. vi 
h. Situation: H. 232f, 295, 304, 310- 
315 iii 3), 397 
thero: *Held 
peas 371, 385 
hide: bergen (lurk; harbour; ef.); 
*verbergen; Versteck, ver- 
stecken (H. 124, 273) 
H. 33, 36, 219, 222, et passim 
thistorian: *Historiker 
H. 152, 393f, 396 
(Note: of. also H. gooff.) 
t Historical: historisch 


historical: historicality: tgeschichtlich, 

Geschichts-, *Geschichtlichkeit 

(fin. H. 10) (df. H. 375, 378, 381, 
385f) 


H. 10, 19-22, 38, 197, 234f, 332f, 
361f, 372-404 (II, V), 409f. 415, 
417, 417 N. V, 435 gai 
world-historical: weltgeschichtlich 
(See entry below.) 
thistoricsm: *Historismus 
H. 396 
thistoricity: *Historizitat 
(fin. H. 10, 20) 
H. 20 
historiology, historiological: Historie, 
historisch 

(df. H. 375, 378, 392, 394, 396) 

( fin. H. 10, 397) 

H. 10, 20f, 38f, 45f, 152f, 235, 247, 
332, 361, 375-377, 379-382 
(Section 73), 386, 389, 392-397 
(Section 76), 398, 415, 418 | 


542 


thistorize: geschehen 
(fin. H. 19, 371, 384 (df. H. 375) 
xt. toh 371, 375-378, 378-382 (Section 
73)» 383-390, 392, 404, 413, 436 
(See also "happen’.) 
+ History: Historie 
(fin. H. 397) 
H. 399-403 _ 
history: Geschichte 
(fin. H. 10, 19) (df. H. 10, 19, 378, 
379, 388, 391) 
h. of, equipment, work, 
ideas: H. 395 
h. of the humane sciences: H. 398 
h. of literature: H. 10, 397 
h. of ontology: H. 19-26 (Section 6), 


culture, 


39 

of philcsophy: H. 302 

of the Present: H. 393 

of problems: H. 10, 240 n. vi 

of the sciences of man, society, 2nd 
state: H. 398 

of the spirit: H. 395. 397 

of the uncovering of the dpyat: 
H. 212 

. of what-has-been-there: H. 295 

. of the word ‘cura’: H. 109 

. of the word Aöyos: H. 32 

. of the word ‘phenomenology’: H. 

28 


Pes oh ee 


oe bo > 


philosophy of history : H. 402 ( Yorck) 
science of History: H. 375 378, 404 
(See also ‘histortology’.) 
natural history: H. 388 
world-history: Weltgeschichte 
ri eniry below.) . 
ving a history: H. 378, 382, 417 
making history: H. 378 
Hegel on history: H. 428, 434, 436 
Yorck on history: Nets ff 
See also “gf 372-377 (Section 
72), 378-382 (Section 73), 386, 
399, 417, 418 n. v, 426 
hold: halten; gelten; ete. 
(fin. H. 354) 
Thold back: “sich enthalten; re- 
nH GD (H. 169) 
n., H. 61 
H 61, 357f, 393 
(Note: the verb ‘enthalten? has been 
translated i in other ways.) 
hold fast: festhalten 
(fin. H. 354). 
H. 177, 198, 355, ei passim 


Being and ‘Time 


thold a? true: *für wahr halten 
( fin. H. 256) 
H. 256f, 265, 307f 
hold free: freihalten (keep open; steer 
clear; et.) 
H. 307f 
hold itself in: *Ansichhalten; Sich- 
darin-halten (H. 87) 
(fin. H. 75) 
H. 75, 80 
(Noise: the verb "anhalten’ 
translated in other wavs.) 
held on to: halten 
(fin. EI. 347) 
BR. 338, 344, 347, 349f 
Ecchi open: offen halten (keep cpen, 
H. 169) 
H. 2o4f 
hold up: aufbaiten; vorhalten (H. 266) 
(fin. H. 354) 


(Nowe the reflexive ‘sich aufhalten’ ts 
always translated as ‘dwrel:’.) 
hope: Hoffen, Hoffaung, erhuffen 
H. 236, 345 
horizon, horizonal: *Horizont, tiori- 
zontal 
fir. H. x) 
herizonal schema: 
Schema 
(af. zi. 365) 
the “h ow das Wie 
H. 27, 344, 2188, 32 345, 97° 
Tthe ‘how one is’: “wae cimemi wi? 
H. 134, 188, > 
Numan: Mensch (msn), *menschlic 
* Menschen- 
(See man.) 
thuman-Thing: * Menschending 
H. 60, 120 
thumane sciences: 
schaften 


H. 10, 38, 46, 129, 376, 397-399 


the “I”: das Ich 
(df. H. 116, 318, 322, 332). 
the “I” as subject: H. 22, 317, 322 
the “I” as the “who” of Dasein: 
H. ı14$, 129, 267, 313, 317, 322 
the abstract “I”: H. 401 (Yorck) 
the isolated “I”: H. 116, 118, 179, 


hes beer 


*horicor tails 


* Geisteswissen- 


298 
the pure “TI”: H. 229 
the worldless “I”: H. 316 
tI-here: H. 11g, 132 


Index of English Expressions 


the “I”’—eont. 
ti-hood: *Ichheit 

H. 116, 318, 323 

tI-Thing: *ichding 
H. 107, 119 

the “I am”: das 


(fin. H. 54) 
H. 54, 129, 211, 297, 321, 38: 
(See also H. 278, 317) 
tf am-as-having-been: ich bin- 
gewesen 
i7. 326, 328 


“ich bin” 


(See also FH. 349) 
Yam concerned Py ee 
i take action: Fi. 4.9 


{ think: R. 24, 


BEL, AP? 


the givenness ow tbe “im, E, 46, 
rif, ru, Sfr 

the noi-I: ii. o 4333 

saying “P. EL i Time 

Descartes ut. Bo OR. Go 

Hegel en ihe. gt 

Humboldt an ite 2: 0». te 

Kant on pee SS, ZIN-ERE 


320 sı X> 


the 1” ara vie sot oi, 1208, 9210-27, 
348 
idea: *Idee; . 
H. 34, 20° sia Hegi, et 
passim 


ideal. "Ideal. wt, ENEA 
H. 156, aE sau Ein 1000, 205, 300, 
310, 450 7 we, 438 (Peel), 
I 
*idealism: *Idro: innus 
H. 34, 183, 2%, 206-208, 
identical: #iderti «* 
(fin. H. 114) 
H. 114, 130 


tidle talk: teres 


321 N. XX 


ay. FH. 168f, 177) 
:70 (Section 35), 
"18, 222, 252f, 

255, 271, 27°, 2G8, 346 


the ‘if--then’: des ‘\-enn-so” 
H. 359 
tiil-humour: $ riistat 
í fin. H. 134) 
H. 194 
iHamine, illusurare: erhellen; *erleu- 
chter; as uchten 


H. 133 ferteu 
Illusion: *fibucon 
illusion: Schel 


nm}, 251 (Erhellung) 


543 


fimmanent: *:immanent 
Fi. a, 136 244, 197, 216, 2:5 
inrzeliate: "unmittelbar 
Fa. 3, Syl, 430, 433-435 
fass’s# 
tinwnobilize: 
H. 37: 
timmoriai: *unsterbuch 
H. 199, 267f, 320 n. xix 
“impend: hevorsiehen, Bevasiand 
(fin H. oro) 
H. < esol, 25 37; 264, 355 
(Mole: this list includes all Passages FN 
which these expressio «re irans- 
lated as ‘stand a 
impossibility: *#Unmöghchxeti 
H. 250, 255, 262, 265, 320, 4:2 el passim 
in: in; 
fd 


KoD H. 54) 
(See also Being-in.) 
in advance: im Vorhine::; êz. 

(See also: grasp in a., nave in a., see 
in a., take in a.) 

{the “in-between” : *das Inzwischen 

H. 409 

in the face of: vor 
(See face to face with.) 
in the first instance: zunächst 
(fin. H. 6) 
in itself, in themselves: an sich, an 
ihm selbst, an ihnen selbst 

(fin. H. 75) 

H. 16, 28, 30f, 69, 71, 74-76, 87-90, 
94, 106, 112, 116, 118, 169, 191, 
201f, 207, 209, 209 n. xvii, 212f, 
218, 227f, 264, 288, 329, 354, 
380, 400, 405, 419, 424-426, 435 

(Note: this list also includes the 
in which ‘Being-tn-ttself’ and ‘Being 
-in-themselves’ aptear.) 

in me: in mir 
H. 204-5 (Kant) 
the ‘‘in-order-to” : das Um-zu 

(fin. A. 65, 78) 

H. 68f, 74, 78, 82, 86-88, 149, 192, 
261, 355, 364f, 414 

fin the present: *gegenwartig 
H. 369, 378, 380 
in time: in der Zeit 

(See time.) 

the “in-which”: 

H. 84-87, 202 

in the world: *in der Welt 

(fin. H. 19) 

H. 53, 65 


ad 


‘San ep)s 4 
(TEBEL), Ge 


still legen (in. H. a7r) 


das Wobei 


544 
inappropriate 
(See appropriate.) 
inauthentic: Sunzigentlich 
i. anxigty: i 189 
i. awaiting: H. 425 
i, P an terse H. 675, 53, 7." 
175-178, 191, 193, 233, © ° 
205, 304, 331, 335, 350, 39: 
i, Being-ahead-of-oneself: H. 195 
i. Being-in-the-world: H. 179 
i, nen H. 252, 25¢' 


264, 37 
L Being a-uhol; H. 331 
ess: = 325, 331 
i everydayness: H. 178 
i, existence: H. 23a, 328, 376, 367, 


410, 425, 436 
i, future: H. 337, 343) 347 
i, having- : 339, 345 


y historicality : H. 376, 987, 390f, 396 


ner biities of H. 281, 331 
ties of concern: H. 947 
i. i Potentiality.for Being- a-whole. H. 


331 
1. Present: H. -338, 347 
i. Self; H. 181, 332 
i. temporality: H. 326, 329, 331, 341, 


i i “they”: : H. 179, 332 
i. they-self: H. 181, 303 
i. time: A. 329 
i. ee: H. 146, 148, 254, 
326, 337-339 
inconspicuous; *unauffallig 
(See conspicuous.) 
inconstancy: Unständigkeit 
(See constant.) 
tincorruption: *Unverdorbenheit 
H. 180 
tindebtedness; *Verschuldung 
But cf. are indebted to (verdanken, 
399 n. xiv) 
H. 284, 287f, 290-293, 300, 306 n. 
ii, 307 
indefiniteness: Unbestimmtheit 
of the call of conscience: H. 273f, 
278f 
of the caller: H. 274f, 280 
of death and its “when”: H. 253, 
258-260, 263, 265, 308 
of that in the face of which one is 
anxious: H. 186f 
of Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being: 
H. 208, 
of resoluteness: H. 298 


Being and Time 


of the Self to which the appeal is 


made: H. 274 
ef the Self which is concernful: H. 
22 =. 
af ie understanding of Being: H. 5 
$ what Dasein finds itself alongside 
in uncanniness : H. 188 
of what one’s drive and will are out 
for: H. 210 
t:ndeterminate immediate: : *unbes- 
timmte Unmittelbare 
H. 3 (Hegel) 
indicate: anzeigen, Anzeige; zeigen; 
*indizieren, *Indikation, Index 
( fin. H. 77) 
id. 77-82, 215, et passim 
{Indifferent, Indifference: indifferent, 
ig 
(fin. H 
H. 48, 59, 121, 123f, 160, 169, 192, 
194, 208f, 212, 232, 259, 269, 
at 283, 295, 323, 331, 387, 352; 


(Note: this list includes all passages. in 
which the German expressions have 
been translated by ‘undifferentiated’, 
‘without further differentiation’, 


af etc.) : 
en indifferent: “gleichgültig 


(fin. H. 42, 255, 429) 
H. 42, 121, 123f, 134, 144, 175, 2496, 
254f, 265, 280, 342, 345, 352, 
358, 361, 386, 429f (Hegel) 
oa ae ungehalten 
Sige h - 347) 
174, 347 
individual, +f dividuality: aia 
(*single; particular, H. 399); 
*individuell (H. 395); *In- 
dividualität (H. 403) 


‚findividualize: *vereinzeln 


( fin. H. 142) 
H. 39, 142, 187-189, 191, 263-266, 
276f, 280, 307, 310, 322, 336, 


u..,339 ‚343 
tindividuation: *Individuation 
H. 38 
infer: schliessen, Schluss; 
entnehmen; 
318) 
(fin. H. 75, 315) 
tinfinite, infinity: unendlich, *Unend- 
lichkeit 
(fin. H. 330) 
H. gaf, 330f, 424f, 427 n. xiii 


folgern ; 
erschliessen (H. 


Index of English Expressions 


tin-finite, in-finitude: *un-endlich, 
*Un-endlichkeit 
(fin. H. 330) 
H. 330f 
information: Kenntnis; Aufschluss; 
* Auskunft: *Nachricht; Kunde 
` H. 9, 52, 148, 2721, 280, 287, et passim 
tinhood; *Inheit 


453 0 
inner, inside, inward: inner, *inner- 
lich; *innen, *Innen-; *in- 


wendig; innig (H. 216) 

H. 31, 56, 60, 62, 101, 132, 136f, 188, 
203-206, 216, 273, 364, 389, 
401 (Yorck), 435 (Hegel) 


tinner experience: *innere Erfahrung 


H. 204 

tinner life: *Innenleben 
H. 273 

tinner sense: *innerer Sinn 
H. 203 


tinner sphere: *Innensphäre, *in- 
nere Sphäre 
H. 60, 62 
tBeing inside: *Innensein 


tInsideness: *Inwendigkeit 
H. 56, 101, 132, 188 
inquire: fragen 
H. 5, 7-11, 20f, 38, et passim 
tinsignificance; lacking significance: 
*Unbedeutsamkeit; * Bedeu- 
tungslosigkeit (H. 273) 
H. ı86f, 273, 343 
tinspect: nachsehen; *beschauen (H. 
146); *zusehen (H. 81) 
(ftn. H. 123) 
H. 355, 358 
tintelligible; *verstandlich 
(fin. H. 151) 
H. 4, 59, 81, 86, 151-153, 161-165, 
168f, 209, 220, 271, 324, 225, 
366, 368f, 405, 408, 410, 412 
(Note: this list also includes the passages 
x in which ‘unintelligible’ and ‘un- 
intelligibility’ occur.) 
tintend: *intendieren 
(fin. H. 5) 
H. 5, 94, 295, 390 
tintent (adj.): gespannt 
H. 175, 261f 
fintention, intentional: *intentional 
H. 48, 363 (n. xxiii) 
interconnection: Zusammenhang 
5 


545 


Interpret, Interpretation: *interpre- 
tieren, *Interpretation 
(Jin. H. 1) (df H. 130, 150, 232, 331) 
interpret, interpretation: auslegen, 
* Auslegung 
‘fin. H. 1, 148, 149, 409) (dr. I. 62, 
148, 149, 150, 231f) ) 
H. 148-160 (Sections 32, 33), et passim 
interrogate: *befragen 
H. 5f, 8, 13f, 41, 56, et passim 
fintervene: einspringen 
( fin. H. 100) 
H. 100 
țintuit, intuition: anschauen ; *Wesens- 
schau (intuition of essences, H. 
147) 
But cf. intuitionists (*Intuition- 
ismus, H. 9), intuitive (*intuitiv, 
H. 37) 


(Jin. H. 27, 402) 
anschauen: 


forms of i.: H. 31, 367 
objects of i.: H. 30, 215, 358 
1. Of Reality: H. 202 
1. of space: H. 112 
i. as care: H. 193 
limitations of pure beholding: H. 
135, 138, 341 
voetv as beholding: H. 06, 171 
Hegel on i.: H. 430f, 439f 
Husserl on ìi.: H. 363 n. xxiii 
Kant on i.: H. 30f, 215, 358, 367 
Yorck on i.: H.. 402 
(Note: this list also includes all 
passages in which ‘anschauen’ is 
translated as ‘behold’.) 
invoke: berufen 
tinvolve, involvement: 
*Bewandtnis 
(fin. H. 84) 
H. 80, 83-88 (Section 18), ggf, 103f, 
110-112, 117, 123, 129, 140, 
144, 148-150, 158, 186, 210, 
261, 2907; 300, 343, 353-357; 
359-361, 364, 368, 412 
tirrationalism: *Irrationalismus 
H. 136 
tirresoluteness: *Unentschlossenheit 
H. 299, 308, 322, 336, 3381, 384, 390, 
410 
Tisolate: *isolieren 
(fin. H. 142) 
isolated “I” or subject: H. 116, 118, 
179, 188, 1g2f, 204, 206, 298, 321 
See also H. 19, 82, 247, 344, 352f, 388 


*bewenden, 


546 

issue: *es geht um... 
(fin. H. 8) 
(df. H. 191, 192) 

tit’? calls: *‘es” ruft 
( fin. H. 275) 

_ H. 275-277 

item: Moment 

item of equipment: Zeug 
(fin. H. 68) 


tjoy: Freude 
H. 310, 345 
judgment: *Urteil, *urteilen, *beur- 
teilen 
But cf. verurteilen (condemn, H. 
185) 
j. and assertion: H. 32, 153, 214, 224, 
226 N 
. and the copula: H. 159, 349 a 
. and binding: H. 32, 159 
j. and knowing etc.: H. 210 (Scheler), 
213, 216f 
j. and Aöyos: H. 32 
j. and the “they”: H. 127 
j. and truth: H. 33, 214, 226 
J 
c 


Le 


‚and validity: H. 155f 
overt judgments: H. 4 (Kant), 23 
(Kant) 
theoretical judgments: H. 157 
acts vs. content of j.: H. 156, zı6f 
See also H. 204 (Kant), 224 (Kant), 


273- 
tthe “just-always-already-alongside”: 
*das Nur-immer-schon-sein-bei 
(Jin. H, 195) 


« 195 ; 
the ‘just as’: das “So—Wie”’ 
H. 216, 218 
(Cf. also H. 219, 222) 
tthe ‘just now’: *das “‘soeben”’ 

_H. 407, 424 
Tjust-present-at-hand-and-no-more: 
*nur noch vorhanden 

(fin. H. 74) 
H. 73, 81, 88, 238 


Tkeep silent: schweigen 
H. 161, 164f, 273, 296, 325 
know, knowledge: erkennen, Erkenntnis 
wisen; kennen, Kerintnis; etc. 
Bai cý make knows; (sekunden; 
*;undgeben, *Kundgabe; ankün- 
digeri; well-known (bekannt) 
(Hr. 11. 25, 36, 123, 124, 146) 


Being and Time 


erkennen, Erkenntnis: 

(Note: this list also includes several 
passages in which these words have 
been translated as ‘cognize’, ‘cogni- 
tion’, etc., but not those in which 
they have been translated as ‘recog- 
nize.) | 

k/c (in general): E. 71, 134, 138, 170f, 
324, ef passim 
k/c of Nature: H. 152 
k/c of the present-at-hand (See 
theoretical k/c.) 
k/c of the Real: H. 202 
k/c of the Self: H. 146 
k/c of space: H. 111 
k/c of the world (See know the world.) 
k/c and intuition: H. 258, 363 n. xxiii 
k/c, judgment, and truth: H. 210, 
215-219, 228 
k/c and making-present: H. 363 n. 
xxiii | 
k/c and mood: H. 134, 136 
k/c and understanding: H. 143, 356 
historiological k/c: H. 392 
perceptual k/c: H. 67 
rigorous k/c: H. 152 
scientific k/c: H. 28, 152, 324 
theoretical k/c: H. 69, 136, 166, 335, 
352, 356-364 (Section 6gb) 
theory of knowledge (See epistem- 
ology.) 
Augustine on k/c: H. 171 
Descartes on k/c: H. 95f, 100 
Kant on k/c: H. 215, 358 
Scheler on k/c: H. 210 
wissen: 
. of death: H. 251, 258, 425, 
. of distances: H. 106 
, of entities encountered: H. 58 
. of space: H. 368 
of what one is capable of: H. 
144, 270, 336 
. and acquaintance, H. 155 
. and curiosity: H. 172 
. and mood: H. 134-136 
. and the Other: H. 174 
Scheler on k.: H, 210, 210 n, xix 
kennen, Kenntnis: H. 36, 124f, 169, 
178, 252, 300, 330, 367, 401, 
425, ef passim 
(See also acquaintance, informa- 
‘tion, take cognizance.) 
tknow oneself: *Sichkennen 
(jin. H. 124) 
H. ı24f 


Fa a pE pe pae 


te, Che 


Index of English Expressions 547 
tknow the world: *Welterkennen, tleap after: *nachspringen 
*das Erkennen der Welt (Jin. H. 347) 
H. 58, 59-62 (Section 13), 65, 67, H. 347, 369 
131, 138 tleap ahead: *vorausspringen 
. He (fin. H. 122) 
lack: Mangel, mangeln, mangelhafte. H . 122 


ermangeln; fehlen; Un-; etc. 
tMangeln, 
ermangeln: 
(9 H. 283) 
H. 16, 113, 233, 260, 269, 282f, 
285f, 291, 336, 374 
tfehlen: H. 4, 9, 39, 82, 163, 179, 202, 
233, 243, 256, 328 


n-: ß 
Unbestimmtheit: lacking signific- 
ance: H. 1 
Unfreiheit:: lack of freedom: H. 312 
Unganzheit: lack of totality: H. 
236, 242, 244, 259 
Ungestimmtheit: lack of mood: 
H. 134, 345, 371 
Unkenntnis: lack of acquaintance: 
H. 146 
unverstindig: lacking in under- 
standing: H. 219 
Unverständnis: lack of under- 
standing: H. 195, 207 
Unzusammen: lack of together- 
ness: H. 242f, 400f 
(Note: as these entries indicate, we 
have used the word ‘lack’ much 
more freely than Heidegger's dis- 
cussion on H. 283 strictly warrants.) 
language: *Sprache; Sprach-; sprach- 
lich; etc. 
(fm. H. 25) (df. H. 160, 161) 
H. 9, 87, 119, 133, 157, 160-167 
` (Section 34), 272, 949, 369, 406 
last (verb): *dauern 


H. 391, 409 
the “later” : das Später 
H. 327, 421 
the “later on”: das “Späterhin” 
H. 40,49 
flaw: "Gesetz ` 
H. 10, 47, 296f, aBef, 293, 361, 395 
Tlaw-breaking: “Rechtsverletzung 
H. 28ef 
tlay open: *aufschliessen 
(fin. H. 75) 
H. 75 359 
tlay out: auslegen (H. 409); anicz:n 
(H. 104); *herauslegen (H. i50) 
(fin. H. 149, 409) 


mangeln, mangelhaft" 


Heap away: entspringen; abspringen 
| ( 


H. 262) 
H. 347f, 350 
(fin. H. 347, 348) 
{Note: cf. also H. 427, et passim.) 
tleap forth and liberate: * vorspring- 
end-befreiend 
(fin. H. 122) 
H. 122, 298 
tleap in: einspringen 
(fin. H. 100, 122) 
H. 122 
tleeway: *Spielraum 
( fin. H. 368) 


H. 107, 145, 355, 368f 
let be: sein lassen 


H. 84f, 345, 354 


‚let be encountered: begegnen lassen 


(fin. H. 328, 329) (df. H. 137, 366) 
H. 85f, ı 11, 137, 326, 328, 346, 354, 
356, 366, 408 
tlet be involved: *bewende:: lassen 
(fin. F. 84) (df. H. Baf, 3° ff} 
H. 84-56, 1 10f, 353-356 
tlet be seen: *sehen lassen 


H. 327:3 , 44, 63, 154f, 1: 032, 218% 
R: ds. 
let coms ...wards one e: I. 812, 
m „ornmen lasser 
(See cor... towards.) 
level: * Bor ele. 
tlevel co~ >: *einebner 
H. 12; . 
tlevel off: ::ivellieren 
H. 88, 15, 194, 226. 9, 405, 
422. 424-426, 43 “1, XXX, 
435 
tliberate: *heiveien 
H. 122, 165, 204, : 3, 303, 
Hliberty E indifference - sleichgül- 
tigkeit cer Will 
H. 144 
tlie ahead :-: *vorlage 
(fin. Hes Fy 264, 4 
H. 259, ... 302 
life, living: . ven, lebt. + 
But cf. i:vehihood +: rtkommen) 


(fin. H. 45, 58) (df. H. 41, 50, 58) 


548 Being and Time 


tlight up: *aufleuchten 
H. 72, 75f, 83, 343 
fliken: angleichen 
(fin. H. 214) 
H. 153, 214, 219, 393 
(Note: this list includes all passages in 
which ‘angleichen’ has been trans- 
lated as ‘assimiiate’.) 
tlimit-situation: *Grenzsituation 
H. 249 n. vi, 301 n. vi, 308, 349 


life—cont. 
that which has life (Lebewesen, 
Lebendiges, Lebende, Nur- 
lebende): H. 10, 25, 48, 50, 
97, 165, 194, 240, 247, 346, 377 
life and care: H. 198 (Hyginus) 
life and death: H. 104, 238, 240, 245- 
247, 249 n. vi, 316 
(Ses also connectedness of life.) 
life and historicality: H. 401 (Yorck) 


life and historiology: H. 396 flink: *verketten; *verknüpfen; 
(Nietzsche) *knipfen 

life and language: H. 163 H. 33, 159, 202, 268, 388, 390, 417 

life and philosophy: H. 402 (Yorck) Tliquidate: beheben (*obviate, 

life and Reality: H. 212 *remedy) 

life and the “they”: H. 177 , (fin. H. 236, 300) 

life, curiosity, and idle talk: H. 173 H. 236, 242 

life as a business: H. 289 tlisten: hören; *abhören; *hinhören; 

the full and genuine ‘life’: H. 177 *zuhören 

tthe inner life (*Innenleben): H. 273 (fin. H. 271) 


tthe cares of life (*Lebenssorge): H tlisten (*zuhören): H. 164 
tlısten away (*hinhören): H. 271 
flisten in (*abhören): H. 139, 175 
flisten to (*hören auf.. .): H. 163, 
168, 271, 275 
lit up (See light up.) 
literature: *Literaiur 
H. 10, 127, 397 
live (See life.) 
jlocation, locus, local, locative: *Ort, 
“örtlich 


57 

the connectedness of life (See con- 
nectedness.) 

the philosophy of life: H. 46, 48, 338, 


403 

the science of life (biology): H. gi, 
28, 49 

living (ia general): H. 194 

tiiving along (*dahinleben): H. 345, 


405 
‘living’ away from oneself: H. 179 


m (Jm H: t. 
‘living’ concretely: H. 178 location of Dasein: H. 132, 968, 
living in a myth: H. 313 417f, 424 
living in an uncerstanding of Being: location of the present-at-hand: H. 
54, 361f 


H. 4 

tliving on (*fortleben): H. 247 

Tiiving unto the day (*in den Tag 
hieninleben): H. 370f 

tliving-through (*Er-leben): H. 47 
(Scheler) 

the urge ‘to live’: H, 195f 

geiting lived by one’s world: H. 195f 

getting lived by tae ambiguity of 
publicness: H. 299 

Diltbey 7 life: H. 46, 209f, 249 n. vi, 


3: 
Yorck on life: E. ¿00-402 
light: Licht; Helle; ieicht; etc. 
But cf. light up (*zuticuchten) 


(fin. H. 133 360) $ 


spatial location: H. 54, 119, 132, 
299, 416-418, 428 (Aristotle) 

change of location: H. 91, 97, 389 

locative expressions: H. 119 

locus in a system: H. 428f 

locus of language: H. 166 

locus of the problem of history; Ï. 


375 : 
locus of the problem of historicality: 
H. 377 
locus of truth: H. 33, 154, 214, 226 
*logisch 


logic, logical: * Logik, 


H. 2f, 10f, 129, 143, 152, 157-160, 
165, 214f, 285, 315, 319, 357, 
375, 398f, 432 n. our, 433, 437 


Licht: H. 28, 350i, 359, 412f, et tlongevity: *Lebensdauer 
a H. 246, 246 n v 
Helle: H. 28 look: See entries below. 


leicht: H. g6of 


tabsehen (look away): H. 961 


Index of English Expressions 


look—cont. 
tsich ausnehmen wie . . . (look 
like . . .) H. 398 
+* Ausschau halten (look out for): 


H. 153 
faussehen: H. 28-30, 42, 61, 63, 69, 
73, 135, 138, 172f, 222, 946, 
403 
(Note: this list also includes the one 
passage tn which ‘Aussehen’ is 
translated as ‘outward appearance’ 


—viz. H. 69.) 
Blick, *Durchblick, *Blickweite, 
Hinblick, *hinblicken, *rück- 


blicken: see passim. 

T*hinsehen, *Hin-sicht: H. 7, 33, 61, 
69, 73, 79, 112, 119, 135, 138, 141, 
149, 158, 220, 264, 335f, 351, 


357 
tpflegen (look after): H. 54, 56 
schen: H. 67, 71, 416 
tsuchen: H. 278, 423 
t*Oberschau (look over): H. 358 
t*umsehen (look around): H. 336, 


358 

t*wegsehen (look away): H. 
261f, 347, 424 

lose, loss: verlieren. (waste, H. 157); 

Verlust (go, H. 56); *verlustig 
gehen; etc. 

lose its aroundness: H. 112 

lose its basis: H. 119 

lese its Being: H. 176, 239 

lose the Being of one’s “there”: H. 
237 


119, 


lose one’s Being-in-the-world: Ff, 
236, 238 

lose its equipmental character: H. 
61 


lose its force: H. 127 

lose its genuineness: H. 142, 

lose its indigenous character: H. 36 

iose its involvement-character: H. 
112 

kze one’s life: H. 235, 238 

lose oneself: H. 42, 76, 116, 124, 128, 
177, 179, 195, 253, 265, 289, 


312, 344, 3481, 369, 390 
lose its readiness-to-hand: H. 73f 
lose its sign-character: H. 81 


lose one’s time: H. 404, 410, 418, 425 
ithin- . 


lost in what is encountered wi 
the-world: H. 76 

iost in equipment: H. 354, 422 

lost in everydayness: H. 263 


549 


lost in factual circumstances: H. 265 

lost in irresoluteness: H. 308 

lost in just-always-already-alongside: 
H. 195 

lost in the making-present of the 
“to-day”: H. 391 

lost in possibilities which thrust 
themselves upon one: H. 264 

lost in publicness: H. 175, 271 

lost in something with which one is 
concerned: H. 277, 289, 312, 
344, 422, 424 

lost in the “they”: H. 175, 177, 189, 
253, 268, 271, 274, 287, 289, 
297, 299, 307f, 383, 390 

lost in the they-self: H. 263, 266 

lost in the world ofequipment: H. 354 

lost in one’s ‘world’: H. 221, 277, 
312, 348f 

lost hearing: H. 271 

lost making-present: H. 355, 366 

lost Present: H. 345 

(See aiso H. 119, 166, 277, 348, 400, 


407) 
tlove: *Liebe 
H. 190 n. iv 
tloyalty: *Treue 
H. 385, 391 
Tiust of the eyes: *Augenlust 
H. 178 


tmagic: *Magie; *Zauberei 
H. Sr, 247, 313 
maintain: halten, erhalten, 
halten, festhalten; etc. 
Jin. H. 256) 
e certain: *sich vergewissern 
( fix. A. 29:) 
H. 265, 291, 293 
make determinate: 
H. 62 
tmake history: *Geschichte machen 
H. 378 
make known: *bekunden; *kundgeken, 
Kundgabe; ankitndigen 
make one’s own: aneignen (appro. 
priate) 
H. 15, 21, 62, 71, 171, 220, 226, 977, 
386, 396-398 
(Note. ‘his list also includes all pas: ages 
in which ‘aneignen’ is translai-d as 
appropriate.) l 
tmake present: gegenwärtigen 
(Jin. H. 326, 347, 359) (df. H. 328, 
338, 366) 


durti- 


bestimmen 


¿550 


make present—cont. 
H. 26, 326-328, 338f, 342, 344, 346- ~. 
350, 353-357, 359f, 363, 363 n. 
xxiii, 365f, 369, 381, 391, 406- | 


410, 413f, 416-418, 420-422, 425 | h È x 


tmake public: veröffentlichen 
H. 411, 414f, 417-420, 423 


lated as ‘publish’ or “publication’.) 
{make room: *einräumen 
( fin. H. 111, 368) 
H. 111, 299, 368f 
tmake unpresent: *ungegenwärtigen 
H. 355 


make up, go to make up: ausmachen’ 


(constitute; establish; etc.) 

But of. make up for (nachholen, 268, 
406); help make up (mit- 
machen, H. 176). 

make use (See use.) 
man: Mensch (human, ete.) 
man’s Being: H. 25, 45, 48f 


man’s Being towards God: H. 10, 


man’s substance: H. 117, 212, 914 

man’s transcendence: H. 49 

man as rational animal: H. 48f, 165, 
183, 197 

man as the entity which talks: H. 165 

man as unity of body, soul, spirit: 
H. 48, 117, 198 

man as made in God’s image: H. 48f 

man as the ‘subject’ of events: H. 379 

‚ man as an ‘atom’ in world-history: 

H. 382 

man and Dasein: H. 25, 46, 182 

man and the world: H. 57, 105, 152 

man and the environment: H. 57 

man and the lumen naturale: H. 133 

Aristotle on man: H. 171 

Calvin on man: H. 49 

Dilthey on man: H. 398 

Hyginus on man: H. 198f 

Seneca on man: H. 199 

Zwingli on man: H. 49 

See also H. 51, 54, 60, 97, 120, 176, 
179, 198, 203» 246, 371, 37% 

82, 396, 400f, 425. - 
(Note: this list also er 

principal passages in which the word 


“city “3? 


(Note: this list also includes all passages P E zA 143) 
| in which ‘veröffentlichen’ is trans- .smhanifesy: 
lated as ‘give a public character’, ` 


but not those in which it is trans-- 


Being and Time 


‘human’ has been used in translating 
= ‘Mensch’, ‘menschlich’, or the prefix 
„© ‘Menschen-’. In view of Heidegger’s 
P;; insistence in H.. 46 that the term 
TE ‘Mensch’ is to be avoided, these 

ages are of interest.) 
: vorstehen (H. 143); eic. 


ir *offenbar, offenbaren; 
"*Machtäusserung .(H. 275); 
"#Lebensmanifestation (H. 402) 


manifold: mannigfaltig; mannigfach; 


vielfältig 
tmanipulate, manipulable: *hantieren ; 
handlich 


hantieren: H. “33, 61, 67, 69, 102, 
352-354 937-30 
handlich: H. 68f, 73), 78, 108f, 127, 
288, 355, 414, 418 
(Note: this list includes all passages 
in which "handlich" and its deriva- 
tives occur. Sea our glossary entry.) 
fmanual: handlich (H. 109); Hand- 
‘buch (H. 9) 
material: materiell, material, Material; 
Geschichtsstoff (H. 400) 
fmateriell: H. 47 n. ii, g8f, 238 
tmaterial: H. 68, 293f, 320 n, xix 
tMaterial: H. 73, 320 n. xix, 366, 


3 
ee *Mathematik 
H. 9, 63, 65, 88, 95f, 153, 362, 402 
matter (nom): *Materie; etc. 
t*Materie: H. 10, QI; 362 
(Note: the noun ‘matter’ has been used 


informally in translating many 
other expressions.) 

matter (verb): angehen, *Angänglich- 
keit; etc. - 


H. 106, rarf, 137-139, 141, 170 
maturity m e bring to maturity.) 


meaning: 
( fin. Hr 1, 197, 151) (df. H. 151- 
153, 156, 161, 324) 
meaning of ne , *Sinn 


des are *Sinn von Sein 
ul: *sinavoll (H. 151) 
meaningless: “sinnlos (H. 151) 
innig (H. 152) 


H. 151, 154, 221, 324, 348, 361 
(Note: while the noun ‘meaning’ has 
been reserved for ‘Sinn’, the verb 
‘mean’ has been used informally to 


$ 


i 


; Index of English Expressions 


méaning—cont, 
translate ‘meinen’, 
sagen’, ‘sagen’, etc. ) 


‘heissen’, "be- 


measure, measurement: Mass, messen, Bo, 


ausmessen; metrisch; etc, 


But cf. measure up (genügen); aut” 
to the measure (zugeschnittengig 


(df. H. 417f.) 


m. ofspace and spatial distances: HS | 


ro2f, 105f, 110f, 369 
m. of time: A. 71, 404, 413-415, 
417-419 | 
See ulso H. 68, 262, 358, 417 n. iv. 
(Note: the German expressions listed 
and their derivatives are often 
translated informally in -other 


way:.) 
tmechanics: *Mechanik (H. 429, Hegel) 
But cf. tmechanical (*mechanisch, 
H. 400, Yorck; "handwerklich, 


H. 394) ar 
tmechanistic: *mechanistisch (H. 402, 


Yorck) 
But cf. *mechanism (*Mechanismus, 
H. 2 *Getriebe, H. 382) 
(fin. H. 402) 
tmedical: ¢medizinisch 
H. 241, 247 
medieval ontology 
H. 3, 25, 40, 93f 
metaphysics: *Metaphysik 
H. 2, 2ıf, 56, 59, 248, 299, 401f 
(Yorck), 433 n. xx 
method, methodology, methodological, 
methodical: *Methode, *meth- 
odisch, *Methodologie (H. 38, 
398), * Methodik (H. Paes): ; Weg 
(H. > 
df. H. 303 
. 2, 27-39 (Section 7), 49, 66f, 131, 
139, 156, 160, 182, 185, 190, 
202, 205 n. xv (Dilthey), 208, 
215, 230, 248, 255 n. xiii, 280, 
301-305 (Section 61), 309, 310- 
316 (Section 63), 924, 332, 362, 
387, 393, 398 (Dilthey), 399f 
(Yorck), 402 (Yorck) 
mine, tmineness: meines, *Jemeinigkeit 
H. 41-43, 53, 114-116, 118, 191, 228, 
232, 240, 253, 278, 424f 
Tmisgivings: *Bangigkeit 
H. 142, 345 
miss: fehlen (lack; absence; efc.), 
verfehlen (fail; etc.); "vermissen 


551 


fehlen: 
(df. H. ı20f, 283, 355) 
H. 73, 75, ı20f, 191, 242f, 283, 
353, 355, 407, 422 
(Note: see a our entry for ‘lack’ above 
and of. H. 24, 49f, 55, 149, 203, 
216, 273, 339; 357, where ‘fehlen’ 
has been translated in other ways.) 
verfehlen: H. 130, et passim 
vermissen: 
(df. H. 73, 355) 
H. 73, 294, 355 
mode, modal, modify: 
*modal, *modifizieren 
(fin. H. 20, 59) 
tmoment, moment of vision: *Augen- 
vlick; *momentweise (H. 292) 
(fin. H. 328, 338) _ 
But cf. momentary (*momentan, 
H. 374, 423, 430). 
tmoment: H. 142, 165, 172, 258, 
308, 391, 425 
tmoment of vision: H. 328, 338, 
39° n. iii, 3444, 347, 349f, 371, 
5f, 3918, 2 397+ 410, 427 


* Modus, 


foment $ 
H. 78, 394 
tmonumental: *monumentalisch, 
*monumental 


H. 396f (Nietzsche) 
tmood: *Stimmung; 
(attuned) 
(fin. H. 134, 344) 
H. 134-139, 142, 148, 162, 169, 190, 
251f, 265, 270, 276f, 284, 310, 335, 
339-346, 371 
(Note: this list includes the passages in 
which “gestimmt” and its derivatives 
have been translated by forms of 
‘attune’ or “have a mood’.) 
tbad mood: *Verstimmung: H. 134, 


136 
tlack of mood: *Ungestimmtheit: 
H. 134, 345, 371 
moon: *Mond 
H. 243 
tmoral: *moralisch, ete.; *sittlich, etc. 
H. 167, 282, 286, 288, 293, 295 
tmortal: *sterblich 


gestimmt 


. 199 
most part (See for the most part.) 
tmotion: Bewegung, sich bewegen (H. 


419 
H. 10, 91, 178, 180, 362, 375, 3888, 
392, 419, 532 n. XXX, 435 


552 

move: bewegen; rücken; -räumen; 
etc. 

finove around: umräumen (re- 


arrange, H. 109): H. 111, 368 

Tmove out of the way: wegräumen 
(clear away, H. 129): H. 111, 
308, 368 

tmovement: *Bewegtheit; Bewegung; 

Richtung (H. 38, 47) 

*Bewegtheit: H. 134, 177-180, 348, 
3744, 388 n. ix, 389 

Bewegung: H. 9, 91, 97, 100, 42! 
(Aristotle), 421, 428 (Aristotle), 


435 
multiplicity: Mannigfaltigkeit; Viel- 
faltigkeit (H. 322); *Vielheit 
(H. 429) 
H. 3, ı02f, 1:0, 112, 164, 
417, 429, ef passim 
{myth: *Mytkes 
H. 51 n. xi, 313 


203, 362, 


Nature, natural: *Natur, *natürlich 
(df. H. 65) 
*Natur, *Natur- 
K. g-it, 19, 25, 47 N. 8, 48, 69, 63, 
05 70f, Ba, 95, 98-100, 106, 112, 
144f, 132, 165, 179, 199, 211, 
36:-369, 377; 379, 388, 388 n. 
"x, 3ol-2c0, 401 (Yorck), 404, 
eal 4'5. 4i7 n. iv, 418, 428 
„ir istotle) ; 429, 431, 432 Nn. XX, 
434 (Haze) 
natura! history: *Naturgeschichte: 
H. 388 ; 
fratural science: *Naturwissen- 
schaft: 


H. 63, 362, 398, 400 
(Yorck) 


tenvironing Nature: *Umweltnatur: 
B. 71, 981, 413 
Thing of Nature: *Naturding: H. 
48, 63, gof, 211 
(Note: while ‘Natur’ has been trans- 
lated either as ‘Nature’ or as 
‘natural’, ‘natürlich has been trans- 
lated only as ‘natural’. The word 
‘nature’ has been used informally to 
translate other expressions.) 
tnaturalistic: *naturalistisch 
H. 47 n. il, 320 n. xix 
necessity: Notwendigkeit 
H. 143, 214, 226, 228f, et passim 
Tnegate, negation: *negieren, Negation 
(deny, H. 229) 
H. 22, 207, 229, 286, 429-435 (Hegel) 


Being and Time 


negative: *negativ; prohibitiv (H. 260) 
H. 159, 248, 286, 429f (Hegel), 433f 
(Hegel) 
neo-Kantian epistemology 
H. 215 
tnever dwelling anywhere: 
thaltlosigkeit 
new: neu (*novelty, H. 172; ele.) 
H. 174, 271, 346, 348, 391 
no lenger: nicht mehr 
tno- longer - being -able- to- be- there: 
Nicht-mehr-dasein-können: H. 


250 
( fin. H. 250) 
tno-longer-Being-there: H. 236 (Cf. 
H. 381, 393) 
tno longer Dasein 
( fin. H. 250) 
H. 237f, 240, 242, 330 
tno-longer-now: *nicht-mehr-jetzt 
H. 327, 421, 424 
tnow-no-longer> “jetzt nicht mehr 
H. 380, 406, 421 
tno longer present-at-hand: H. 374, 
378, 3 
tBeing-no-longer-in-the-worid: H. 
176, 238, 240 
See also H. 373, 430f (Hegel), 
passım. 
nobody: *Niemand 
H. 128, 177, 253, 268, 278, 425 
no one: keiner; etc. 
H. 1297f 
the “not”; *das Nicht 
H. 29, 283-286 
tnotness; *Nichtheit 
H. 235f 
tnot-Being: *Nichtsein 
H. 170, 243, 431 (Hegel), 434 (Hegel) 
{not right away: *vorläufig noch nicht 
H. 255, 258 
not yet: noch nicht 
(fin. H. 259) 
H. 145, 242-246, 250, 259, 317,325, 
347, 373, 380, 393f, 427, 430f 
(Hegel), et passim 
tthe ‘“‘not-yet-now”: *das Noch- 
nicht-jetzt: H. 327, 421, 424, 
427 
tthe “now-not-yct”: “das Jetzt- 
noch-nicht: H. 406, 309, 421 
tBeing-not-yet: *Noch-nicht-sein: 
. H. 237, 246 
fnot yet present-at-hand: H. 144, 
237, 249, 374 


* Aufen- 


Index of English Expressions 


nothing: nichts; etc. 

H. 43, 128, 186-189, 266, 273, 276f, 
279, 308, 343, 352, 431 (Hegel), 
ei passim 

Tnovelty: das Neue (new) 

H. 172 

now: jetzt; etc. 

H. 325, 338, 338, n. in, 373, 378, 
406-411, 414, 416-418, 421-427, 
430-432, 432, n. OX 

Tnow-here: *Jetzt-hier: H. 421, 430 

now-no-longer (See no longer.) 

now-not-yet (See not yet.) 

{now-point: *Jetzt-Punkt: H. 430 

now that: jetzt, da... 

(fin. H. 408) 

H. 406-408, 410f, 414, 422 

fnow-time: *Jetzt-zeit: H. 421, 423, 
426 

tjust now: *soeben: H. 407, 424 

no-longer-now (See no longer.) 

not-yet-now (See not yet.) 
tmultiplicity of “nows”: *Jetztman- 
nigfaltigkeit: H. 417 

say “now”: *Jetzt-sagen: H. 406, 
408, 416, 418, 421 

tsequence of “nows”: *Jetztfolge, 
*Folge der Jetzt: H. 329, 373; 
422-426, 431f 

tstream of “‘nows’’: *Jetztfluss: H. 
410, 436 

nowhere: *nirgends 

H. 175, 177; 186-188, 347 

tnull: nichtig 

But cf. annul (tilgen, H. 434); 
nullify (vernichten, H. 61, 131) 

(fin. H. 284) (df. H. 285, 343) 

H. 23, 178, 206, 219, 237, 283-288, 
305f, 308, 325, 330, 343f, 348 

(Note: this list also includes those 
passages in which ‘nichtig’ is trans- 
lated as ‘nugatory and ‘count for 
nothing’ .) 

number (acun): *Zahl; *Anzahl (H. 
125, 409); *Masszahl (H. 417); 
le 


ei. 
Zahl: H. 215, 418, 432 n. xxx 
(Bergson) 
füumcral: *Nummer 
H. 125 
fnumeration: *Geschichtszahl (his- 
torical numeration, H. 418 n. v) 
foumerical: *zahlenmäsig (H. 412, 
418); *zahlhaft (H. 18) 


553 


Object: *Objekt 
(fin. H. 363) (df. H. 363) 
O. and judgment: H. 156, 216 
O. and subject: H. 59f, 156, 176, 179, 
192, 204, 208, 216, 219, 366, 388 
(Note: cf. also H. 316.) 
O and world: H. 60, 179, 203, 366 
O. of historiology, etc.: H. 10, 375f, 
392, 397, 401 
object: *Gegenstand; etc. 

(Note: the word ‘object? has often 
been used informally in translating 
substantwized participles such as 
“das Besorgte’—‘the object of con- 
cern’—etc.) 

Gegenstand: 

o. of an assertion: H. 157 

o. of concern: H. 238 

o. of historiology, ete.: H, 152, 
375, 380, 392-495 

o. of judgment: H. 214, 224, 273 

o. of knowing: H. 60, 215 (Kant), 

218 
. of mathematics: H. 9 
. of phenomenology: H. 34-36 
. of a science: H. of, 238, 361 
. to be disclosed: E. 232, 303 
person as o.: H. 47f (Scheler), 114 
Kant on 0.: H. 215, 25.4 
Scheler on 0.: H. 471, 210 
tObjectify: *objektivieren; *objicieren 
(H. 419) 
H. 48, 82, 363, 375f, 378, 381, 419f 
TObjective: *objektiv 
(df. H. 395, 419) 
O. Being: H. 64 
O. distance: H. 106 
Objectively actual: H. 
(Stoker) 
Objectively ‘there’: H. 389 
Objectively valid: H. 156 
Objectivity and subjectivity: H. 278, 
326, 366, 405, 419 
Objectivity of the appeal: H. 278 
Objectivity of historiology: H. 395 
Objectivity of a science: H. 395 
Objectivity of time: H. 405, 419 
Objectivity of the world: H. 366 
See also H. 237, 260, 275, 289, 363 
tobjective: *sachlich 
H. (1, 21, 27, 45, 98, 122, 265, 333, 


oO000 


272 n. vi 


377 

observe: betrachten (consider; study; 
contemplate, H. 9213); *be- 
obachten 


554 
observe—ont. 

*beobachten: H. 340, 358, 362, 415 
tobstinacy: *Aufsdssigkeit 

(fin. H. 74) 

H. 74f, 186, 354 a u 
fobtrusiveness: *Aufdringlichkeit. 

( fin. H. 74) 

H. 79-75, 81, 189, 354, 377 . 
obvious: selbstverständlich (*self-evi- 

dent); offensichtlich (open, H. 


128); etc. 
occasion, occasionally, on occasion: 
*Veranlassung; *gelegentlich; 


jeweils; zuweilen; etc. 
(See also on that former occasion.) 
toccupy: einnehmen Ares in, H. 368f); 
*besetzbar (H. 109) 
But cf. er a (*Beruf H. 239) 


en 107f, 413, 416 
occur: *vorkommen 
(in. H. 106) 
H. 12, 29, 33, 48, 54-56, 63, 6gf, 73, 
1, 102, 104, 117, 119-121, 
125, 128, 154, 170, 173, ae 
oe 188, 194, 252-254, 257, 2 
291, 299f, 327, 33 338, ’ 
344, 


7, 384, 404f, 419f 
focular: *okular 


400 (Yorck), 402 (Torck) 
on that former occasion: *damals 
"H. 406-409, 421f 
on the basis of: auf dem Grunde (by 
reason of; because of); auf dem 
Boden; woraufhin (with regard 
to which; upan which; where- 
upon; etc.) 
woraufhin: H, 6, 8sf, 110, 148 
fon its way: Sunterwegs 


H. 79 
tonce for all: *einmalig 

H. 395 
oncoming (Ses come along.) 
t'one dies’: “man stirbt” 


H. 253-255 
ontical: *ontisch 
(fin. H. ıı 
H. 11-15 (Section 4), 19, 43, 92, 63, 
94, 114, 116, 182, 199, 201, 266, 
279, 293, 312, 324, 371, 982, 
399f (Yorck), 402$, et passim 
paises. ontological: *Ontologie, 
*ontologisch 


(fin. H. 11, 12) (df. H. 11, 12, 27, 95, 
38 » 231, 232, 248) 


Being and Time 


H. 8-11 (Section 3); 12, 15f, 27, 43, 
2, 94, 116, 182, 199, 201, 204, 
Bi as (II, III), 266, 
295, 311f, 403, 436, et passim 
(See also ancient o., fundamental o., 
medieval o.) 
fopaque: *undurchsichtig 
H. 11, 44, 146, 156 
: offen; *dfinen; etc. 
H. 137, 163, 169, 265, 307f, 341, 350, 
369, 392f, 396f, 408, 421 
t ity: *Gelegenheit 
. nes „7% 300, 359, 389 


W H. 289) 
o. conception of Being: H. 387, 389 
o. conception of Being guilty: H. 282 
o. conception of conscience: H. 269f, 
279, 289-295 (Section 59) 
o. conception of the ‘connectedness 
of life’: H. 374 
o. conception of Dasein: H. 374, 378, 


427 
o. conception of historicality: H. 377 
o. conception of history: H. 376f, 
378-382 (Section 73) 
o. conception of phenomenon: H. 
31, 35 37 
o. conception of time: H, 17f, 24, 
235, 304, 326, 329f, 333, 338 n. 
in, 404-437 (II, VI 
origin, orginate: Herkunft (derivation) 
toriginal: *origindr 
But çf. original sin (Erbsiinde, H 
190, n. iv.) 
H. 37, 62, 224 
Other: Andere; fremd (H. 124) 
(df. H. 118) 
Being towards Others: H. 124f, 177 
Being-with Others (See Being-with. 
coming to owe something to Others: 
H. 282 - 
conscience of Others: H. 298 
N of Others (See Dasein- 


with.) 
death of Others: H. 237-241 (Section 


47), 25% 257 
encountering of Others: H. 117, 120, 


12 
fearing for Others: H. r4ıf 
potentiality-of-Being of Others: H. 
264, 298 
solicitude for Others (See solicitude. } 
understanding Others: H. 123 


Index of English Expressions 


Other—tont. 


See also H. 126, 128f, 155, 174, 266,.. 


281f, 383, 418 
(Note: 
been used to translate the un 
capitalized adjective ‘andere’ etc.) 
tthe other-worldly: *das Jenseits 
H. 148 
ought: Sollen 
H. 283 
out for... (See Being out for.) 
toutlast: *überdauern 


H. 247 
outside: ausser; Aussen, draussent 
ausserhalb 
tBeing-outside: *Draussensein: H. 
62, 162 


{Being-outside-of-itself: * Aussersich- 
sein: H. 429f (Hegel) 

tthe “outside-oftself”: ”. *dJas Ausser- 
sich: H. 329, 350, 365 

“‘outside-of-one-another”’: *das 

Aussereinander: H. 429 (Hegel) 

See also H. 62, 118, 136, 162, 177, 


205, 227, 243, 366, 374, 419, 


435 
(Note: see also ‘external world’.) 
toutstanding: *Ausstand, ausstehen 
(fin. H. 236, 250) (df. H. 242) 


the 


H. 144, 227, 233f, 296f, 241-246 


(Section 48), 249f, 259, 317, 374 
foutstrip: *überholen 
(fin. H. 391) (af. H. 264) 
H. 250-256, 258f, 263-265, 307, 309, 
330, 383, 386, 391 
over again (See repeat.) 
towe: *schulden; verdanken (H. 405) 
But cf. come to owe (schuldig werden) 
(fin. H. 281) 
H. 242, 281f 
ownmost: eigenst 


tpallid lack-of-mood: 
stimmtheit 
H. 134, 345, 371 
tparadoxicality: *Paradoxie 
H. 402f (Yorck) 
tparalogism: *Paralogismus 
H. 318 (Kant), 320 n. xix (Kant), 
332 
I A jeweilig; etc. 
tpass along: weitersagen; *nachsa 
(H. 19); weiterreden (H. 168) 
H. 155, 169, 277 


*fahle Unge- 


the uncapitalized ‘other’ has- 


555 


Tass away: vergehen 
(fin. H. 380) 
H. 373, 382, 393f, 422f, 426f 
also arising and passing away.) 
pass over: übergehen; überspringen 


-» tpast: *Vergangenheit, eee 


(fin. H. 326, 380). (df. H. 328, 378, 
_ 380, 381) 
H. 20-23, 326, 328, 374, 378-381, 
385f, 391, 393-395, 424, 427, 
`, 431 (Hegel) 
re theology 


139 
en Gestalt 
But cf. language pattern (Sprachge- 
bild, H. 349) 
H. 165, 399f (Yorck) 
tpay off: tilgen 
H. 242, 307 
But cf. pay for (bezahlen, H. 219); 
pay — ’s way (bestreiten, H. 
300); e 
tTpeasant’s ea: *Bauernuhr 
H. 416 
*perceive, perception: vernehmen; 
*wahrnehmen 
vernehmen: 


Cer 25) (df. H. 25, 336, 6ıf, 


34 
H. 25, 33f, 61f, 67, 94, 96-98, 115, 
147, 163, 170-172, 212, 224, 
273, 335, 346, 351, 400 (Torck) 
(Note: this list also includes all 
passages in which ‘vernehmen’ has 
been translated as ‘aware’.) 
® wahrnehmen: 
(df. H. 149) 
H. 120, 135f, 144, 146f, 149, 181, 
217f, 243, 354, 363 n. xxii 
tperfunctoriness; Nachsehen 
(fin. H. 123) 
H. 123 
tperish: *verenden 
H. 240f, 247, 251 
beharrlich (H. 2ogf); 
fpersist, persistent: beharren, beharr- 
oa lich; sich durchhalten; bestehen 


bleiben (H. 174); anhaltend 
(H. 134) 

beharren, beharrlich: H. 45, 322f, 
373-375 


n: *Person; ete. 


(df. H. 47f) 
person as object: H. 114 


559 


person—ont. 
person-Thing: H. 120 
practical person: H. 319 
God as person: H. 275 
personal actions: H. 272 
personal Being: H. 47f 
personal consciousness: H. 278 
personal immortality: H. 320 n. xix 
personal pronouns: H. 42, 119 
depersonalization: H. 48 
personalism: H. 47f, 47 n. ii, 272 n. 


vi 

Heimsoeth on personality: H. 320 n. 
xix 

Husserl on personality: H. 47, 47 n. 


ii 
Kant on personality: H. 318f, 320 n. 
1x, 323 
Scheler on personality: H. 47f, 272 
n. vi, 320 n. xix 
See also H. 22, 38, 46, 119, 137, 274, 
278 
(Note: thts list includes all passages 
of which we have record in which the 
German word ‘Person’ and tts 
derivatives occur, but does not in- 
clude any passages in which ‘person’ 
has been used to translate other 
expressions.) 
TPharsa'sm: *Pharisäismus 
H. 291, 293 
phenomenology, phenomenological: 
*Phänomenologie, *phänom- 


enologisch 

(df. H. 27f, 34f, 37, 357) 

H. 27-39 (Section 7), 39, 47, 51 n. 
xi, 69f, 89, 115f, 116 n. i, 191, 
1396, 147, 159, 180, 184f, 207, 
208 n. xvi, 218 n. xxxiv, 219, 
249 n. vi, 267, 272 n. vi, 357, 


375 
See also pre-phenomenological. 
phenomenon, phenomenal: *Phäno- 
men, *phanomenal 


{ fin. H. 29, 303) (df. H. 28-31, 63) 
H. 28-31 (Section 7 A) et pasim - 
See also pre-phenomenal. 
Tphilological: *philologisch 
H. 21, 152 
philosophy, philosophical: *Philo- 
sophie, *philosophisch . 
(df. H. 6, 13, 27, 38, 45, 50 n. x, 
208, 213, 229, 310, 436) 
‘the business of philosophers’; H. 4, 
23, 220 (Kant) 


Being and Time 


‘the scandal of philosophy’: H. 203, 
205 (Kant) 
philosophy of culture: H. 167 
philosophy of history: H. 402 (Yorck) 
philosophy of language: H. 166 
philosophy of life: H. 46, 48, 398, 403 
philosophy of Nature: H. 432 n. xxx 
(Hegel) = 
et passim . 
tphysics, physical: *Physik, *physisch, 
*pohysikalisch 
H. 9, 33, 60, 95f, 204, 206, 218, 361f, 
367, 401f (Yorck), 417 n. iv, 419, 
428, 431 n. xxx 
tphysiology, physiological: *Physiol- 
ogie, *physiologisch 
H. 190, 241, 246f, 402 (Yorck) 
fpicture: Bild; *ausmalen (H. 262) 
(fin. H. 217) 
H. 217, 249, 271, 400 (Yorck) 
place: *Platz. *platzieren; Ort (H, 
399, 432 n. xxx); Stelle (H. 130) 
But cf. dwelling-place (sich auf- 
halten, H. 119); hiding-place 
(Versteck, H. 273); take place 
(abspielen, H. 9; sich bewegen, 
H. 168). 


t*Platz, *platzieren 
( fin. H. 368) (df. H. 102) 
H. 97, 102-104, 107f, 111f, 361f. 
358, 413, 416 
plants: * Pflanzen 
H. 246 
fplead one’s cause: sich verhandeln 
(discuss, H. 27; etc.) 
H. 274, 293, 296 
tplunge: *Sturz, *stürzen; stossen (H. 


See also downward plunge. 
poetry: Dichtung 
H. 16, 162 
point (now): *Punkt; etc. 
H. 105, 107, 119, 179, 362, 374, 407, 
429f, 432, et passim 
tpoint back: zuriickweisen (reject); 
*rückweisen (H. 291f) 
H. 14, 151, 290, 294 
tpoint forward; *vorweisen i 
(fin. H. 291) ; 
H. 280, 291f, 302 
point out: aufzeigen; aufweisen 
aufzeigen: H. 155-158, 160, 218, 
227f, et passim 
aufweisen: H. gaf, et passim 


Index of English Expressions 


fpolitical: *politisch 
H. 16, 193, 400 (Yorck) 
posit: ansetzen, Ansatz; setzen, mit- 
setzen; féstlegen (H. 197) 
ansetzen, Ansatz: H. 46, 99, 109, 
114, 147, 204, 208 n. xvi, 229, 
291, 373 
setzen, mitsetzen: H. 88, 193, 203f, 
215, 365, 430-432 (Hegel) 
(Note: except perhaps in the pages on 
Hegel, these expressions are by no 
means technical terms for Heidegger, 
and we have translated them freely 
in other ways.) 


position: Stelle, Stellung; Stand; Posi- 


tion we 24, 204); #t. 
Stelle: H. 102-104, 107, 110, 112, 
119, 362, 368f, 420, et passim 
Stand: H. 71, 321, 415, et passim -` 
positive: “positiv ( tive, H. 150) 
positive sciences, etc.: H. 9-11; 50-52, 
58, 324, 398 


positive os. privative, negative, 


critical, etc.: H. 19, 52, 75, 141, “pe 


260, 279, 286, 378, et passim ` 
positive character of the call; of 
conscience: H. 279, 294, 300: - 
possibility: *Möglichkeit se 
(df. H. 143) k 


T 
p- of an authentic Bun. 


Being: H. 266, 343 Er 
Bo 


557 


existentiell possibilities: H. 267-270 
a. 54), 336f 

factical possibilities: H. 264, 299, 

nee hie and possible possibilities: 


1 cal = ibili H. 

o ties: I 

ae ar possibilities: H. 396 

wntical and ontological possibilities: 
H. 312 

traditional. possibilities, etc.: H. 383, 
385, 391 394 

possibility and actuality: H. 38, 262, 


2 

Ps Gddiction, and urge: H. 195f 

p. and curiosity: H. 347 

p. and historiology: H. 394 

p.,' projection, and understanding: 

SH. 145-148, 151, 194, 260, 270, 

274, 284, 295, 902, 306, 312, 

ne 336, 339, 383, 387, 394, 

p. as. en and as category: H. 

. I 

Dasein as possibility or Being- 
“ possible: H. 42f, 143-145, 188, 

i = 248f, 259 

Being-towards-death as a possibility 
of Dasein: H. 260, 266 

an as 4 possibility of Dasein: H. 


p- ir are i a3 u ae a : ti 250-266, 302f, 307, 309, 
p- ‚ 12 ? ee 
Gh, eae te 148, aS, docoveredums = a possibility of 
173, 177f, 181, 187f, 191, 1980.47 g: 
195, 199, 211, 296, 239f, FA ws -.. Are os 262 
250, 4 264, 266, ee TER the u o : 7 ey” to pos- 
288, 2 25, | 
wa 598 the en of possibilities : H. 
of ‘having’ an environment: A 


5 

of the impossibility of existence: 
H. 250, 262, 265f, 306 

of irresoluteness: H. 339 

of nullity: H. 330 

of the ready-to-hand: H. 187 


239f 
. of resoluteness: H. 302 
. of sight: H. 412 

p. of taking action: H. 294 2 
4 of temporality: H. 304 = 
p. of ‘willed’ entities: H. 194f 
accidental and provisional possibil- 
‘ities: H. 384 


PYP PPYPPP P P 


o potentiality-for . 
h potentiality-for-Being: *Seinkönnen 


of representation by another: H., ; 


: -können 


(fin. H. 250) (df. H. 86, 144, 285) 

authentic potentiality-for-Being: H. 
233, 235, 267-301 (II, 11), 302, 
313, 317, 322, 343 

chosen potentiality-for-Being: H. 

` 288, 298, 394 

existentiell potentiality-for-Being: H. 
260, 280, 313, 385 

. factical potentiality-for-Being: H. 
145, 187, 268, 280, 298, 306, 
325, 341f 

ontical potentiality-for-Being: H. 
260 


558 


potentiality-for-Being-—ont. 
ownmost potentiality-for-Being: H. 
153, 181, 188, igt, 221, 228, 
250-255, 259, 26af, 265, 267, 
273, 276-279, 287f, 296, 299, 
306-308, 317, 325, 335f, 339, 


3 
projected potentiality-for-Being: H. 
336f, 365 
(Note: contrast H. 194, 343, 395; 
406.) 
whole potentiality-for-Being: H. 264, 
266, 303, 317 
Dasein as potentiality-for-Being: 
H. 143, 145, 191, 231, 250, 252, 
264f, 277, 284, 287, 312f, 337 
Dasein as delivered over to its 
potentiality-for-Being: H. 383 
Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being as an 
issue: H. 284, 327 
(Note: contrast H. 3:3.) 
potentiality-for-Being as soinething 
for the s2ke of which: H. 86. 


191, 1938, 334. 336, 359, 412. 
414 l 
(Nete: contrast Íx. i. Sy ZUR) 
potentiality. “or-Psing of Others: H. 
264 
m -Beisg-guiltv: H. 
289, 350k 


ft potentiality-ior-Seing ju-the-world: 
E. 144, 155, 107, 1911, 223, 252, 
295, 414 
tpotentiality-tor- -Being in the ‘truth’: 
H. 363 
tpotentiality-for-Being-one’s-Self: H. 
175, 184, 267-269, 273-275, 294, 
208, 307; 316, g22f 
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole: H. 
233-235, 237, 266, 301-333 (TI, 
III), 345, 372 
(Note: see also H. 122, 147f, 153, 
173, 256-258, 334 359. It 
should perhaps be remarked that the 
term ‘potentiality-for-Being’ ts al- 
ways used in connection with. some- 
thing of the character of Dasein, 
while the term ‘possibility’, which 
often seems interchangeable with it, 
ts occasionally used in a somewhat 
wider sense.) 
Macht; Kraft (force, eic.); 
Vermögen (H. 16, 236) 
Macht: H., 275, 278, 296, 310, 384f, 
435 (Hegel), et passim - 


power: 


Being and Time 


tpractical: *praktisch 

But cf. practicable (gangbar, H. 
261); practise (Praxis, H. 193; 
üben, H. 320 n. xix) 

(fin. H. 69) 

H. 57, 59, 69, 294, 300, 3t5f, 319, 
320 n. xix, 357f, 364, 492 
(Yorck) 

tprax:s: Praxis (practise, H. 193) 

H. 357f, 402 (Yorck) 

See also mpafis, 

tpre-ontological: *vorontologisch 

H. ı2f, 15-17, 44, 65, 68, 72, 86, : 0, 
182-134, 195-200 (Section 4%), 
197 n. Vi, 201, 222, 225, 260, 
212, 315, 358 

tpre-pheromenal: *vorn:An5menal 

H. 67 

tpre-phencmenclogical: 
omerolozisch 

H. 51,50, 05, 72, 99, 279: 518 

Tpre-philescnäucal: *verpiulssophisch 

H.:9, 302.505 

Tpre-predicative: *vorpradisaiiv 
H. 149, 359 


“yur phan 


tpre-scientiie:  vorwissenschazilich 
(colloquial, H. 57) 
Ti., 9, 302 
tpredicate: *fradikat 
fi. 94, of, 3545, 157, 2245, 262, 318, 
355 
prepare, preparatory, preparation: 


“vorbereiten; bereton: *zube- 
reiten (H. 148); 
*Zurustung /H. 151, 497): "Präparat 
(H. 358); etc. 
presence: *Anwesenheit; *Zugegen- 
sein (H. 75); vor (H. 44) 
(fin. H. 25, 326) 
*Anwesenheit: H. 25f, 71, 415-418, 
423 
(See also have presence, presence- 
at-hand, etc.) 
present (adj.): vorliegend: 
*zugegen (H. 111) 
See also makes present, deprive of its 
character as present.) 
tPresent (noun): *Gegenwart 
(fin. H. 25, 26, 326, 329, 338, 347) 
H. 25f, 326, 328f, 337-340, 342, 344- 
348, 350, 355, 360, 363, 365, 
369, 378-381, 385, 391, 393-395, 
397, 4076, 410, 427, 431 


*jetzig; 


Index of English Expresstons 


present (noun): See in the present. 
present (perb): darstetien (represent, H. 
g4; afford, H. 179}; "Vorgabe, 
vorgeben; geben; ete. 
(fin. H. 150) 
present-at-hand, presence-at-hand: 
® vorhanden, *Vorhandenheit 
(fin. H. 14, 25, 74, 106) (af. H. 42, 
43, 45, 55, 51, 70-74, 88, 183) 
prescrve: bewahren; *verwahren; ste. 
preservation of ‘uncoveredness or dis- 
coveredness: H. 172, 224 
presupposition: Voraussetzung 
reguisite, H. 110); 
(H. af) 
(df. F. 228, 914) 
H. 226-330 (Section 44c), el possim 
provious: vorgängig, ete. 
fprimitive: *primitiv ` 
H. 50-52 (Section 11), 81f, 247, 295, 
415 
priciordia!: *ursprünglich 
(ft. ae (df. H. 231-233. 305, 
CHR 
His aie z3 (Section 44b), ei passim 
priority: ¥ n (“privileged positicn, 
i i ‚ 386; advantage, H. 
D ey 
oF the gu u m of Being: H. 2-15 
En 5 ! 
a a i „von of man’s Being to- 
Wi H. 199 n. iv 
ot Das. a TL. Pf, 19-16, 37, 126° 
of existens uver essentia: H. 43 
of Bein»-ui-ıhe-world as concern: 
H. sg 
of care: H. 198 
of volton and cognition: H. 136 
. of Dasets,’s disclosure of itself: H. 
146 
of ‘seein’: H. 171, 358 
of pure intuition: H. 147 
. of the practical attitude: H. 193 
of ‘bad’ conscience in interpreta- 
tions of the conscience: H. 290 
of time over space: H. 367 (Kant) 
of the future: H. 311 
. of the past: H. 379 
. of having-been: H. 386 
. of making-present: H. 417 
. of the “now”: H. 432 n. xxx 


(pre- 
Vorurteil 


a y 


x ae 
T Fr 
RAPT 8, 


‘es 
23 


DD e 


« 


431f 
. of the present-at-hand: H. 147 


I vuvvuuy vouuens 


. of arising and passing away: H. 


559 


p. of the concept of Reality: H. 201, 
211l 

p. of the isolated subject: H. 204 

p. of idealism over realism: H. z0% 

Every priority is suppressed by the 
“they”: H. 127 

(Note: this list includes those passages 

in which ‘Vorrang’ has been trans- 
lated as ‘privileged position’ or as’ 


‘advantage’. The word ‘prior’ has 
been used freely ta translating 
‘vorliegen’, “vorgangig’, and viher 
expressions.) 
Tprivation, privative: *Privation, 

en 

(jin. H . 58) 

ri. #8, 29, 50, 58, 75, 141, 140, 169f, 
184, 194, 201, 222, 246, 285f, 


291, 357, 378 
process of having been 
(Se; nave been.) 
produce: herstellen (product, 9. 7i; 
restore, H. 99) 
production of clocks: H. ai4f 
production of the reacy-to-hand: 
H. 261, 352 
traduction of signs: H. Sof 
zoduction of work: H. 67, 
117, 353 
production and creation: H. 24, 92 
production as mode of Being-in: H. 
6, 61 
et passim 
progress, progression: Fortschritt, fort- 
schreiten (advance); Fortgang 
(H. 388) 
H. 434 (Hegel), et passim 
tFrojection: *Projektion 
(Sin. H. 124) 
H. 124 
project, 


59-71, 


projection: 
*Entwurf l 
(fin. H. 124, 245, 285, 315) (df. 
H. 145, 147, 199, 221, 262, 
‚284f, 324, 336) 
projection of Dasein: H, 270, 277, 
284, 313, 363, 385, 394, 406 
(Note: see also self-projection.) 
p. of Dasein’s Being: H. 145, 147, 
195, 324 
p. of existence: H. 325, 372 
p. of Being-in-the-world: H. 147 
p. of authentic Being-towards-death: 
H. 237, 260-267 (Section 53) 


*entwerfen, 


560 


project—cont. 


o 


p. of anticipation: H. 266f 

p. of resoluteness: H. 385 ° 

p. of understanding: H. 148, 151, 
174, 265, 324 

p. of possibilities: H. 298, 312, 383, 
94 

p. of a potentiality-for-Being: H. 
148, 305, 336, 365 

p. oe oeann irae H. 235 

p. of a state of Being: 362 

p. of involvement: H. 353 

p. of a world: H. 195; 394 

p. of Nature: H. 362f 

p. of an entity encountered: H. 363 

p. of the primary ‘then’: H. 409 

p. of historicality: H. 376 

p. of the idea of historiology: H. 393 

p. upon its “upon-which”: H. 151, 

p. upon possibilities: H. 145, 147f, 


181, 187, 194f, 222, 263, 270, 
‘284, 295, 297, 299, 312, 315, 
339, 383; 385, 337, 394 ` 


p. upon a potentiality-for-Being: 
H. 194, 262f, 265, 277, 287, 306, 
313, 334, 343, 385, 406 

p. upon a “for-the-sake-of-which” : 
H. 145, 147, 334 

p. upon a “for-the-sake-of-oneself”: . 
H. 327 

p. ur significance: H. 145, 147, 

p. dpon the world: H. 151 

p. upon Banas fi H. 151, 324 

‘Pp. upon Bei 312, 393 

p. upon one’s e's Being guilty: H. 296f, 
301, 305, 382, 385 

p. upon one’s potentiality for. be- 


coming guilty: H. 287, 306 
existential projection: H. 301, 305, 
323, 376, 983 
ontological projection: H. 302, 309, 
312, 393 
understanding projection: H. 314f 
self-projection: H. 276, 287, 382f, 
385f, 387 
resolute projection: H. 386. 
thrown projection: H. 148, 223, 285 
null projection: H. 285, 287f 
inauthentic projection: H. 339 
factical projection: H. 297 
See also H. 313, 330, 336, 360 


“pronoun 


(See personal pronouns.) 


„HA. 217 
- tpsychology, 


Being and Time 
proof, prove: Beweis (evidence; demon- 


strate, 
erweisen 
out); ek. 
Beweis, *beweisen: H. 152, 201, 
202-208 (Section 43a), 229, 269, 
310, 315, et passim 
property: *Eigenschaft 


*beweisen; 
turn 


H. 90), 
(demonstrate; 


t 
"fi. H. 83) (df. H. 42, 83, 88, 133) 


H. 20, 42, 56f, 60, 73, 83, 88, gof, 94, 
133, 151, 157f, 162, g/m 199, 
225, 285, 306, 359, 361 


proposition: Satz (sentence; principle; 


_ ek.) | 
H. 18f, 62, 218 n. xxiv, 349, et 
sim 


pas 
provisional: *vorläufig 


(fin. H. 302) 


oximal, Ak zunächst 
( fin. H. 6, 13) (df. H. 335, 370) 


tpsychical: *psychisch; seelisch (soul, 


H. 48); Seelen- (soul) 
*psychisch: 
psychical vs. physical: H. 60, 204, 
206, 218, 419 
päychical elements and atoms: H. 46 


;psychical occurrences: H. 33, 367 
‘psychical processes: H. 56, 216f, 293 


psychical phenomena? H. 139 


psychical time: H. 349 


ontito-psychical: H. 299 


psychical transposition: H. 400 
tr orck) 

the’ ‘psychical’ vs. acts: H. 47 
: (Scheler) 


psychica cal Being vs. personal Being: 
‚=. H. 48 (Scheler) 

positive _ science of the psychical: 
“eH, 39 

seelisch; Seelen- 

psychical conditions: H. 136f, 273, 


340 
psychical faculties: H. 271f 


‚Peychical life: Seelenleben (life of the 


` soul, H. 46) 
Hi 


124 
tpsychologism: *Psychologismus 


psychological: *Psych- 
_.. ‚ologie, *psychologisch 
psychology of conscience; H. 290 


p. of death and dying: H. 239, 247 


p: : of moods and affects: H. 134, 138, 
340 
p. of original sin: H. 1go n. iv 


Index of English Expresstons 


psychology—cont. 
psychological idealism: H. 207 
Dilthey’s psychology: H. 46, 209, 
8f 


39 
Jaspers’ psychology: H. 249 n. vi, 
301 n, vi 
See also H. 16, 45-50 (Section 10), 
51, 109, 124, 163 
public, publicness: *öffentlich, *Offen- 
ichkeit 
(df. H. 127f, 138) 
publicness of the “they”: H. 138, 
167, 175, 188, 190, 192, 257, 
273 
publicness of Being with one another, 
etc.: H. 174, 239, 252, 370, 387f 
ambiguity of publicness; H. 299 
public idle talk: H. 277 
publicness of the “to-day”: H. 397 
public intelligibility: H. 410 
public interpretation, etc.: H. 169, 
174» 177f, 187, 190, 220, 252- 
254, 270f, 273, 383 
public “at-home”: H. 189 
public environment: H. 
359; 413 
public world: H. 65, 71 
public time: H. 411-430, 424-426 
public conscience: H. 278, 403 
(Yorck) 
public law: H. 282 
public norms: H. 288 
public opinion: H. 403 (Yorck) 
See also: H. 174, 190, 371. 
(Note: see also ‘make public.) 
Tpunctuality: *Punktualitat 
H. 429f, 432 (Hegel) 
Tpunishable: *strafbar 
H. 282f 
put forward 
tput forward casually: 
(H. 311) 
that which is put forward: in the 
assertion: das Ausgesagte: H. 
62, 154f, 157, 218 
(Note: this list includes one passage in 
which ‘das Ausgesagte’ is translated 
as ‘what has been asserted’.) 
{put up with: *aushalten 
H. 261, 325 


126, 354, 
Eu 


*hinwerfen 


tquality; qualitative: Qualität; *quali- 
tativ 
H. gBf, 282, 285, 295, 297, 333, 432 
XX, 434 


fquantıfy: *quantiiizieren 
H. 99, 305, 412 

fquantitative: *quantitativ 
H. 98, 106 362, 432 n. xxx 

question: *Frage; etc. 


radiate 
(See emanate.) 
frapture: Entriickung 


( fin. H. 338, 339) 

H. 338f, 348, 350, 365, 396 

(Note: this list also includes all passages 
in which “Entrückung’ has been 
translated by ‘carry away.) 

rational animal 

(Jtn. H. 25) 

(Nole: see entries for ‘animal rationale’ 
and (pov Àóyoy €yov in glossaries of 
Latin and Greek expressions.) 

tratıonalism: *Rationalismus 

H. 136, 320 n. xix 

read off: ablesen (discern; etc.) 
ready: bereit; gefasst auf; etc. 
bereit: 
tready for anxiety: H. 206f, 301, 
382, 385, 391 
fready for the appeal: H. 287f, 307 

tgefasst auf: H. 60, 236 

ready-to-hand: *zuhanden 

(fin. H. 25, 74, 104, 106) (df. H. 69, 
71, 83, 87, 88, 117, 144) 

tReal, Reality: real (realia, H. 68), 
*Realität 

(df. Hi. 183, 211; contrast H. 128) 

H. 7, 47 n. ii, 68, 94 (Kant), 106f, 
128, 170, 177, 183f, 200-212 
(Section 43), 216-218, 230, 303, 
3136, 318, 320 (Kant), 324, 368, 
400 (Yorck), 420, 437 

real: eigentlich 
(fin. H. 5, 42) 


trealism: *Realismus 
H. 34, 183, 206-208, 208 n. xvi, 215 
realm: *Region, *regional 
(fin. H. 103) 
reason: “Vernunft, vernünftig 
(rational); Grund; etc. 
(fin. H. 25, 34) 
H. 4, 22f, 32, 34, 48, 165, 320 n. xix, 
et passim 
recapitulate 
(See repeat.) 
treckon: rechnen 
H, 284, 293, 333 


562 


reckon—cont. 
reckon on: *rechnen auf 
H. 356, 412f 
reckon up: *verrechnen 
(Jin. H. 300) 
H. 207, 283, 288f, 292, 294, 300, 
06 


4 
reckon with: *rechnen mit 
H. 125, 235, 333, 356, 371, 404, 
411-413, 420, 422 
take into one’s reckoning: *Rech- 
nung tragen 
H. 71, 81, 83, 103, 290, 356, 371, 
404f, 411, 413 
(Note: this list also includes all 
passages in which ‘Rechnung tragen’ 
has been translated as ‘take ac- 
count’.) 
time-reckoning: *Zeitrechnung 
H. 235, 333, 41if, 414-418, 418 
n. v 
recur: *wiederkehren 
H. 391f, et passim 
refer: verweisen 
(See assign.) 
reflect, reflection: “Reflexion, *re- 
flektieren; *Widerschein; etc. 
t*Reflexion, *reflektieren: H. 48, 60, 
115, 155 
fregion: *Gegend 
(fin. H. 103) (df. H. 103, 110, 368) 
H. 79, 103f, 107f, 110-112, 140, 
185f, 368f 
regulate: regeln (control); *regulieren, 
*regulativ; richten (direct) 
fregulate oneself according to: sich 
richten nach 
H. 128, 404, 411, 416, 419f 
(Note: this list also includes two 
passages in which this expression has 
been translated by ‘direct’.) 
treify: *verdinglichen 
H. 46, 420, 437 
trejoin, rejoinder: *erwidern 


(fin. H. 386) 


H. 28, 386 
tRelation: *Relation 
H. 87f 


relate, relation, relationship: beziehen, 


*Beziehung, Bezug; verhalten, 


*Verhaltnis 


(fin. H. 4, 34, 124) (df. H. 77) 
r. between caller and called: H. 274 
r. between phenomenon and logos: 


H. 54 


Being and Time 


r.. between subject and Object 
(See Object.) 

r. between intellectus and res: H. 216 

r. between ideal content and Real 
Object: H. 216 

r; between ideal content and act of 

= judgment: H. 216 

r. between knowing and known: 
H. 218 

r. between assertion and entities 
uncovered: H. 224 

r. between sign and reference: H. 
82 


r. between man and the world: H. 


597 
r. between soul and world: H. 59 
r, between life and death: H. 249 n. 
vi (Dilthey) 
Dasein’s relationship to itself: H. ı25, 


» 433 
Dasein’s relationship to Others: H. 
120, 250 
agreement as a relation: H. 215f 
binding and separating as relations: 
FH. 159 
indicating as a relation: H. 215 
reference as a relation: H. 77f 
location relationships: H. 54 
spatial relationships: H. 54, 112 
relationships of Being: H. 54f, 57, 
60, 62, 122, 124f, 168, 170, 208 
n. xvi, 209f, 238 
relationships of involvement: H. 355, 
359, 361 
‘relation’ as a meaning of Adyos: H. 
=° 32, 34, 159f i 
tnon-relational: *unbezüglich 
H. 250-260, 263-265, 280, 307, 


defining of relationships: H. 400f 
(Yorck) 
frelative, , relativity: 
“  Jativität 
H.’9, 22, 93, 97, 105, 227, 261, 290, 
- :398, 401, 417 n. iv 


*relativ, *Re- 


remember: erinnern 


(fin. H. 339) 
H. 290, 339, 343, et passim 
remote: entfernt 
(See desever.) 
remove: entfernen 
{See desever.) 
trepeat: wiederholen 
(fin. H. 308, 339, 385, 386) (df. 
H. 339, 385, 386, 295) 


Index of English Expressions 


repeat—tont, 
repetition of the analysis of Dasein: 
H 


. 17, 294, 304f, 331-333 
(Section 66) 
repetition of possibilities: H. 343, 
-3856 390f, 395f l 
repetition of the question of Being: 
H. 2-4 (Section 1), 8, 26 
repetition of what has been ontically 
discovered: H. 51 
. and anticipation: H. 391 
. and destiny: H. 386 
. and fate: H. 386, 3g90f, 395 
and the future: H. 386, 397 
. and having-been: H. 339, 3436, 


350, 391, 394f, 397 
f: a oo H. 308, 386, 392, 


ae 


ne: this list includes all passages 
in which .'wiederholen’ has been 
translated as ‘restate’, ‘recupitulate’, 
‘raise again’, ‘over again’, and 
+ ‘revive’. See also H. 380.) 
repentance: *Reue 
H. 190 n. iv 
freport: *berichten, Bericht (record, 
H. 394) ; konstatieren (H. 296) 
H. 29, 140, 158, 277, 320 n. xix 
represent, representation: vorstellen, 
*Vorstellung; vertreten; *re- 
prasentieren; darstellen (H. 94) 
(fin. H. 217, 239, 300) 
vorstellen, *Vorstellung: H. 33, 62, 
139, 154, 159, 203f, 214, 217f, 
319, 321, 354, 359, 367-369, 
410, 424, 430 (Note: cf. also 


. 139. 
tvertreten: H. 59, 82, 126, 230f, 242, 
253 
treproach: vorwerfen 
(fin, H. 145) 
H. 291 
treprove: *riigen 
H. 279, 290-292, 294 


require, requirement: fordern (de- 
: mand; etc.) ; verlangen (demand 
ètc.) ; bedürfen; ete. 


Forderung: H. aBaf, et passim 
research: forschen, Forschung; nach- 
| forschen, Nachforschung 

H. 9-11, 19, 315, et passım 
reserve: *vorbehalten; belegen (H. 

:368) ; *Reserve (H. 122) 

(fin. H. 368) 


563 


treside: mn 
(ftn, H. 54) 
H. 54, et 188, 385 
fresign oneself: *sich abfinden 
H. 152, 355f 
fresist, resistance: *Widerstand, 
*Widerstandigkeit, *wider- 
stehen; widerstreben (H. 88, 
246) 
H. 2, 91, 96f, 137, 209-211, 300, 356 
tresolve, resolute, resolution: *entsch- 
liessen, *entschlossen, *Entsch- 
luss 
(fin. H. 297, 299, 300) (df. H. 270, 
Se 301, 305, 329, 382, 
ıf 


39 

H. 166, 235, 267-301 (II, II; esp. H. 
297-301), 302-304, 305-310 
(Section 62), 313, 316f, 322f, 
325-331, 335-339, 342-345, 349; 
363, 382-387, 390-392, 394-397, 
404, 410, 424 

fresponsible, responsibility: 
Schuld, schuld 
(Jm. H. 280) 
H. 282f 
rest: Ruhe (tranquillity, H. 254, 430); 
ruhen; beruhen; etc, 
H. 172, 178, 303 
(See also tranquil, take a rest.) 
frestless, restlessness: *unruhig, Un- 
ruhe (disturbing, H. 2) 
H. 172, 398, 434 
restate: wiederholen 
(See repeat.) 
retain, retention, retentive: behalten; 
erhalten (H. 204) 

H. 62, 339, 353-356, 359-361, 368, 
388, 391, 406-409, 413f, 416, 
420f, et passim 

fretell: *weitersagen 

H. 155, 169, 277 

treticence: * Verschwiegenheit 

H. 165, 174, 273, 277, 296f, 301, 
305, 322f, 382, 385 

reveal: enthüllen, 

H. 307, et passim 

reverse: . umkehren; “*riickgangig (H. 
268) 
H. 426, et passim 
right away 

(See not right away.) 

fripeness, ripen: *Reife, *reifen 

(fin. H. 244) 

H. 243f 


schuldig, 


564 Being and Time 
tromanticism: *Romantik tthe ‘scandal of philosophy’; *‘der 
H. 65 Skandal der Philosophie’ 
troom: *Zimmer (H. 68), Raum (H. H. 203, 205 (Kant) 
103) fscent: Spur (trail, H. 281), *spüren 


(See also make room.) 
tthe “round-about-us”: *das Um-uns- 
herum 
H. 103 
fround out: *ergänzen 
H. 53, 99f, 131, 148, 255, 316 
run: laufen; etc. 
(fin. H. 243) 
trun ahead: *vorauslaufen (H. 10) 
( fin. H. 262, 264, 302) 
trun away: *entlaufen (H. 347) 
(fin. H. 347) 
frun its course: ablaufen, Ablauf; 
verlaufen, Verlauf; abspielen 
(H. 80) 


verlaufen, Verlauf 


(fin. H. 243) 
H. 243, 355, 367, 404, 410, 428 
ablaufen, Ablauf 
H. 18, 176, 291, 293, 327, 340, 349, 
367, 388, 425 
(Note: this list includes all passages in 
which ‘Ablauf’ and ’ablaufen’ occur, 
regardless of how they are trans- 
lated; the list for ‘Verlauf’ and 
‘verlaufen’, however, is confined to 
those passages in which these are 
translated as ‘run tts course’.) 


tsaid-in-the-talk: *das Geredete 
H. 162, 164, 168, 272f 
sake 
(See ‘for-the-sake-of-which’.) 
Say: sagen; ete. 
(df. H. 169) 
‘saying and discourse: H. 32, 162, 
164f 
. and keeping silent: H. 165 
. and speaking: H. 160 
‚and understanding: H. 168f, 173 
. without audible or explicit utter- 
ance: H. 406, 408, 416, 422 
‘what conscience says’: H. 269, 280 
saying P: H. gı8f, 321-323 
saying “now”, etc.: H. 406, 408, 416, 
418, 421f 
(Note: ‘sagen’ and its compounds 
have been translated informally in 
many other ways, and the verb ‘say’ 
has been used no less informally in 
translating other expressions.) 


wea a 


H. 173f 
(Note: the derivative verbs ‘aufspiiren’ 
and ‘nachspiiren’ have been translated 
as ‘track down’ in H. 94, 146.) 
tscepticism: *Skeptizismus, *Skepsis 
H. 203, 228f, 400 (Yorck) 
tschema, schematic: *Schema, tsche- 
matisch 
H. 78, 132, 270, 332, 359f, 365, 398 
fschematism: *Schematismus 
H. 23, 40 
tscholasticism, Schoolmen: 
tisk, scholastisch 
H. 22, 25, 93, 139 
science; scientific: *Wissenschaft, wis- 
senschaftlich (*scholarly, H. 32; 
learned, H. 171) 
(df. H. 9, 11, 13, 28, 50 n. x, 52, 
62, 152, 357, 3621, 393) 
. of Being: . 26, 230 
. of history: H. 9756, 378, 392, 3971, 


*Scholas- 


404 

s. of language: H. 165f, 349 
s. of life: H. 49 
s. of Nature: H. 404 

(Note: see also ‘natural science’.) 
. of phenomena: H. 31 
of the present-at-hand: H. 324 
of the psychical: H. 398 
. of the ready-to-hand: H. 361 
. of the truth: H. 213 
. of man, society, and the state: H. 


u A a Aa a @ 
ee @ 


‚398 
factical s.: H. 392f 
factual s.: H. 362 
humane sciences 
(Note: see entry above.) 
natural] science 
(Note: see entry under ‘Nature’ .) 
theoretical science: H. 358 
existential genesis of s.: H. 171, 358 
existential conception of s.: H. 357 
logical conception of s.: H. 357 
Objectivity of science : H. 395 
theory of science: H. 45, 375f, 398, 
401 
ethics as a science: H. 402 (Yorck) 
scientific attitude (or behaviour): H. 
358, 361 
scientific projection: H. 363 
See also H. 45, 138, 153, 400, et passim 


Index of English Expressions 565 


ne *Geschreibe 


H. 169 


eve: sehen; sichtbar; ete. 


(fia. AS 69, 171) (4-H 347, 


346 

seeing Being-in-the-worid: H. 58 

seeing colours: H. 33 

seeing entities in their Being: H. 45 

seeing everything: H. 177 

seeing Experiences: H. 119 

seeing the hammer: H. 155 

seeing ‘ideas’: H. 226 

secing possibilities: H. 148 

seeing the ready-to-hand: H. 149 

seeing the Things which are closest: 
H. 149 

seeing something wrongly: H. 281 

seeing the ‘world’ merely as it looks: 
H. 172 

seeing in which one ‘merely’ under- 
stands: H. 149 

secing as a distance-sense: H. 107 

‘seeing’ as made possible by cleared- 
ness: H. 351 

‘seeing’ as determined by the “they”: 
H. 170, 126f 

seeing and curiosity: H. 
(Section 36), 346-348 

the care for seeing: H. 171 

the desire to see: H. 170 

the priority of ‘seeing’: H. 358 

the mutual sharing which sees: H. 


170-173 


155 
St. Augustine on seeing: H. 171 
see in advance 
(See fore-sight.) 
let be seen 
(See entry for this expresston above.) 


(See also H. 351, et passim. The verb ` 


‘see’ has been used informally in 

translating several expressions. The 

above list includes only passages in 

which some form of the verb 

‘sehen’ occurs, and is confined to 

those which are of some philosophical 

interest.) 

seek: suchen (search; try; etc.); wollen 

(want; will; insist; etc.) 

seem: *scheinen, scheinbar (semblant, 
H. 29); Schein (H. 176); etc. 

But cf. seem strange (befremden, 
fremdartig anmuten) 

(fin. H. 29) (df. H. 29) 

seize hold of: *zugreifen, * Zugriff 


seize upon: 


ergreifen 
(Note: the following list includes the 
chief passages in which ‘ergreifen’ 
has been translated as ‘seize upon’, 

‘take hold of”, or ‘grasp’.) 

‘ergreifen’ of possibilities ər potential- 
ities: H. 20, 38, 86, 144, 153, 
195, 268, 299, 302, 342, 344, 

347, 383, 3698 


- .. of one’s own Dasein: H. 122, 188 


. of the Self: H. 129 
. of the disclosedness of Being-in- 
the-world: H. 146 
.. of Being-with: H. 162 
. of everydayness: H. 179 
.. of being guilty: H. 291 
. . of the finitude of one’s existence: 
H. 384 
. of something not specified: H. 12 
126, 273, 326 
. of an entity as something to be 
concerned with: H. 194 
.. of everything: H. 173 
. of a tradition: H. 20f 
. of the problem of existence: H. 
235 n. i 
. of historiology as a science: H. 
332 
. . of phenomenology: H. 38 
. of the “for-the-sake-of-which”: 
H. 193 


Self: *Selbst 


(fin. H. 114, 303, 375.) (See aiso our 
Sor ‘Selbst’ in the Glossary.) 
(df. H. 117, 267, 273, 284, 303, 
303, 318, 323, 332) 
Self as a way of Dasein’s Being: H. 


117 

existentiality of the S.: H. 267, 318, 
322 

S. as the “who” of Dasein: H. 114, 
267 

S, of everyday Dasein: H. 129, 193, 
252, 273 (See also they-self.) 

S. as a constitutive item in Being-in- 
the-world: H. 190, 200, 220, 
273, 297 (Cf. H. 146.) 

S. as authentic or inauthentic: H. 
129f, 181, 317, 332, 433 (Hegel) 

Dasein’s own or ownmost Self: H. 
129, 253, 268, 271, 273, 280, 
288, 295, 339 

Being-one’s-Self 

(See entry for this expression above.) 


566 


Self—cont. 
potentiality-for-Being-one’s-Self 
(See entry for this expression above.) 

S. as disinterested spectator: H. 29 99 
S. as subject or substance: H. 1298, 
317, 320 N. xix, 323, 392 
(See also subject and substance.) 
Self and the “I”: H. 129f, 917-323, 


Self- : H. 923 

S. as thrown: H. 277, 284, 339, 989 

S. as lost in the “they”: H. 271, 274, 
383 (Cf. H. 116, and see they- 


) 
S. as factically existing: H. 419 
selfsameness of the Self: H. 114, 130, 
320, 373 
constancy, inconstancy, and non- 
Self-constancy of the Self 
(See entry above under ‘constant’.) 
failure to stand by one’s Self 
(See entry for this expresston above.) 
fSelf-subsistence: *Selbstandigkeit 
(fin. H. 291, 303, 322, 375) 
03, 3 2 (Cf: H. 291f.) 
ther: H. 124, 128 (Cf. 
a they-self) 
S. as being-ahead-of-itself : H. 193 
'S. and care: H. 193, 304, 316-323 
(Section 64) 
S. and the call of conscience, ete.: 
H. 273f, 277, 280, 288, 296 
S. and resoluteness: H. 298, 300, 310, 
391 
S. and rapture: H. 348 
Dasein’s understanding of the S.: H. 


72 
(See entry under ‘self’ below.) 
‘knowledge of the Self’: *‘‘Selbster- 
kenntnis” 


(fin. H. 124, 146) 
6 


14 

The S. must lay the basis for itself: 
H. 284 

The S. must forget itself: H. 354 

Hegel on the S.: H. 433f 

Kant on the S.: H. 318-321, 320 n. 
xix, 323 

Yorck on the consideration of the Self: 
H. 399, 401 

self, oneself, itself: selbst; Selbst—(in 

certain compounds) ; sich 

tself-consciousness: *Selbstbewusst- 


sein 
H. 401 (Yorck), 435 (Hegel) 


Being and Time 


es Riera *Selbstzergliederung 
I 
ecm Selbstverständlichkeit 
(obviousness) 
H. 4, 16, 43, 49, 93, ei passim 
self-forgetful : selbstvergessen 
H. ns 424 (Cf. also Fl. 277, 942, 


tion, interpretation of 
belt interpretatio : *selbstauslegung 

H. 51, 116, 184, 196f, 200, 912, 318 

self-subsistent : a 

(fin H. 2 & 

H. oy > entry for ‘Sel f-subsist- 
ence’ 

(Note: rene A includes only a faw q of 
ihe more interesting expressions in 
which ‘self’, ‘oneself’, etc. appear.) 

tselfsame: *selbig 
(fin. H: 114) 
H. 114, 130, 188, 218, 320, 922, 373, 
423, 435 
tsemblance: Schein 
H. 29-32, et passim 
tsense (verb), sensation: *empfinden; 
*Sinnlichkeit (H. 97) 
H. 197, 152, 163f 
sense =. Sinn 


. common sense (*Verständig 


eit). 
(fin. H. 1, 137) 
H. 91, 96, 107, 137, 147 
(Note: cf. our entry for ‘meaning’ above 
and our glossary-entry for ‘Sinn’, 
This list includes only passages re- 
Serring to ‘senses’ such as vision or 
touch, not to the ‘senses’ of words or 
other expressions.) 
sentence: Satz 
separation: Trennung (distinguishing; 
etc.) ; Scheidung (distinguishing, 
division, etc.) 
H. 159, 217, et passim 
sequence: Folge; * Abfolge 
s. of days: H. 971 
s. of Experiences: H. 291, 293, 355, 
373, 3871, 390 
s. of “‘nows”: H. 329, 373, 409, 422- 
426, 431f 
s. of processes: H. 379 
s. of resolutions: H. 387 


Index of English Expressions 


serviceability—cont. 


(Note: the verb ‘serve’ has been used 
informally to translate ‘dienen’ and 


several other expressions.) 
tset our sights towards: *anvisieren 
H. 15, 61, 150, 157 
Tsettle: abschliessen 
H. 175, 179, 236, 239, 405 
shape: Gestalt 
H. gof, 112 
share: teilen 
H. 118, 155, 162, 164 
tsinft: verlegen 
H. 355, 357 | 
fshorn: beschnitten (curtailed, H. 316) 
H. 422, 426f 
show: zeigen; etc. 
(fin. H. 29, 77, 122, 178, 304) 
show itself: H. 28-31, 35f 57, 63, 
67F. 728, 97, 137f, 140, 155, 173, 
213, 218f, 222, 361, 421, et 
passım 
(Note: see also our entry for ‘indicate’ 
above.) 
fshrink back: *zurückweichen; zur- 
ückziehen (withdraw) 
H. 23, 127, 185 
tside-by-side: *nebeneinander 
H. 55, 68, 97, 173, 175, 430 
tsight (verb): sichten (sift, H. 51, 394) 
_ HL 33, 45, 75, 146, 312, 359, 421 
sight (noun): Sicht; ete. 
But cf. set our sights towards (*an- 
visieren). 
(fin. H. 69, 123) (df. H. 146, 
147, 170) 
H. 69, 74f, 133f, 146-149, 167, 170, 
173, 336, 347, 358, 412 
sign: Ziechen; etc. 
H. 76-83 (Section 17}, 108, 215 
significance, significant: *Bedeutsam- 
keit; Bedeutung 
(fin. H. 87) (df. H. 87, 123, 143, 
192, 297, 364) 
*Bedeutsamkeit: H. 83-88 (Section 
18), 104, I10f, 123, 129, 143- 
148, 151, 158, 166, 186f, 192, 
210, 297, 334, 364-366, 414, 
422f, 427 
tBedeutung: H. 28, 51, 139, 198 
(Note: see also our eniry for ‘insignifi- 
cance’ above.) 
signification, signify: 
*bedeuten 
(fin. H. 1, 87) (df. H. 161, 166) 


Bedeutung, 


567 
But cf. double signification (Doppel 
deutigkeit, H. 202); has many 
significations (vieldeutig, H. 32) 
H. 77f, 77 n. ii, 87, 93, 150, 157, 165f, 
168, 188, 349, 369 
silent 
(See keep silent.) 
simplicity: Einfachheit, *Simplizitat 
Einfachheit: H. 218, 322, 384, et 
passim 
T*Simplizitat: H. 318 (Kant), 323 
(Kant) 
tsin: *Sünde 
H. 180, 190 n. iv, 306 n. ii 
fSitvation: Situation 
( fia. H. 299), (df. H. 232, 299) 
H. 158, 189, 232f, 235, 299f, 302, 
304, 307, 310-316 (Section 63), 
326, 328, 338, 347, 349, 360, 
382, 384, 391, 397, 410 
(Note: see note on ‘situation’ helow.) 
fsituation: *Lage 
But cf. limit-situation (*Grenzsitua- 
tion). 
( fin. H. 299) 
H. 110, 193, 226, 299f, 359, 369, 371 
(Note: in H. 369 and 371, where the 
words ‘Lage’ and ‘Situation’ appear 
together in the German, we have 
simply used ‘situation’ and indicated 
the German reading.) 
sketch: vorzeichnen (prescribe, deline- 
ate, outline, etc.); “skizzieren 
(H. 43, 51 n. xi); Zeichnung (H. 
8 


39 
(fin. H. 315) 
solicitude: Fürsorge 
(fin. H. 121) (df. 121f, 193, 318) 
H. 121-124, 131, 143, 146, 176, 1936, 
238, 253, 263, 266, 268, 289- 
300, 318 : 
tsoliloquy: *Selbstbesprach 
H. 273f, 401 (Yorck) 
tsolipsism: *Solipsismus 
H. 188 
something: etwas; ek. 
Being-something: H. 160 
something as something: H. 149f, 
159, 359f 
The world is the most primordial 
‘something’. H. 187 
Tsoul: Seele 
H. 14, 23, 46, 48, 59, 114, 117, 202, 
214, 318, 402 (Yorck), 405, 427 


568 


soul—tont, . 

(Note: ses also our entry for ‘psychical’ 
above, the quotations from 
Aristotle and Augustine translated 
in Heidegger’s Sootnotes xiv and xv 
on H. 427.) 

source: *Ursprung; Quelle; etc. 
(fin. H. 348) _ 
H. 334, et passim 

tsouth wind: *Südwind 

H. 80f 

space, spatial: Raum, *räumlich 

(fin. H. 111, 368) (df. H. 56, 112, 
te (Hegel) ) 
H. 9, 18, 31, 54-56, 66, 68, 79, 89, 
101-113 (I, ITE, C), 1198, 132, 
141, 166, 186, 299, 333, 335, 367- 
369 (Section 70), 416-418, 429f 
(Hegel), 432 n. xxx 

_Spatiality of Dasein: H. 56, 89, r01- 

i 113 (I, III, C), 119f, 132, 141, 
299, 335, 367-369 (Section 70) 

spatiality of the “there”: H. 132, 299 

spatiality of Being-in-the-world: H. 
79, 101, 104-110 (Section 23), 
141, 299 

spatiality of Being-in: H. 54, 105f, 
186 | 


spatiality of the world: H. 101, 110- 
112,.369 
spatiality of the ‘world’: H. ıı2 
. Spatiality of the environment: H. 60, 
66, 89, 112 
spatiality of entities encountered in 
the environment: H. 101 
spatiality of the ready-to-hand: 
H. 102-104 (Section 22), 110, 


112, 418 

spatiality of extended Things: H. 
112f, 368 

spatial positions: H. 102, 107, 119, 

tspatial receptacle: *Raumgefäss: 
H. tor 

spatial significations: H. 166, 299, 

space in itself: H. 112 

fspace of Nature: *Naturraum: 


H. 112 
pure space, e&.: H. 112 
space and region: H. 11of, 186, 368f 
space and time, spatiality and tem- 


porality: H. 18, 31, 333, 335, 
367-369 (Section 70), 416-418, 
420f (Hegel) 


Being and Time 


spatio-temporal: H. 362, 367 
tgiving space: *Raum-geben: H. 111 
t taking space in: *Raum einnehmen: 


H. 368f : 

tspatializing: *verräumlichen: H. 
108, 112, 418 

tstretch of space: *Raumstrecke: 
H. 106, 418 

tspace between: *Zwischenraum: 


H. 55 
tworld-space: H. 54, 204 


tspatially-local: *räumlich-örtlich: 
H. 417 . 

Bergson on space: H. 18, 333, 432 n. 
XXX 


Descartes on space: H. 89 
Hegel on space: H. 429f, 432 n. 
Kant on space: H. 89 
tspan: spannen, *Spanne 
(fin. H. 409) 
H. 373f, 409, 414, 416, 423f 
speak, specch: sprechen; etc. 
H. 32, 160, et passim 
Tspeak again: *nachsprechen 
(H. 224); *weitersprechen (H. 
224) ee 
tspeak forth: * Heraussage 
H. 155, I 
tspeak out: aussprechen 
(fin. H. 149, 167, 224) 
H. 167f - 


(Note: see also our entry for ‘express’ 
above.) 
Tsphere: *Sphäre 
inner sphere: H. 60, 62 
‘sphere’ of the Real: H. 202 
` ‘sphere’ of the subject: H. 216 ~ 

sphere of Being-outside-of-itself: H. 

429 (Hegel) 
spirit; spiritual: Geist, geistig 

H. 22, 46, 47 n. ii (Husserl), 48, 56, 
89, 117, 152, 198, 320 n. xix 
(Hegel), 368, 379, 395, 397, 401, 
(Yorck), 404, 405f (Hegel), 427, 
428-436 (Section 82) 

(Note: both ‘Geist? and ‘geistig’ have 
occasionally been translated as 
intellectual, and ‘Getsteswtssen- 
schaft always becomes ‘humane 
science.) 

spring from: entspringen 
(fin. H. 347) 
H. 334, 344, et passim 
*stã-: 
(fin. H. 303, 322; cf. fin. H. 117) 


Index of English Expressions 


stand: stehen; ete. 
(fin. H. 117, 303, 322) 
stand before 
(See our entry for ‘impend’ above.) 
stand by itself 
(See our entry for ‘failure to stand by 
itself”.) 
stand out: abheben (contrast; bring 
out; comparison); herausheben 
(H. 118) 
But cf. outstanding (ausstehen, 
*Ausstand), and fin. H. 250 
tstandard: *Massstab; *massgebend 
(H. 160, 165) 
H. 268, 395, 417 
state: Verfassung: *Staat (H. 398, 403) 
But cf. state of aflairs: *Sachlage: 
H. 51, 158 
(fin. H. 8) 
eonstitutive state: Verfassung 
state of Being: Seinsverfassun 
state-of-mind: *Befindlichkeit, befind- 
lich, sich befinden 
(fin, H. 134, 137, 328) (df. H. 133, 
134, 136f, 190, 276, 328, 346, 


350) 

H. 133, 134-148 (Sections 29-31), 
184-191 (Section 40), 339-346 
(Section 68 b), et passim 

statement: *Aussagesatz: etc. 

H. 157f 

tsteadiness: *Bestandigkeit, beständig; 
*statigkeit 

(fin. H. 423) 

H. 320, 322, 390f, 398 

(Note: the adjective ‘steady’ has occas- 
ionally been used in translating 
other expressions.) 

tstill-a-Dasein: *Nochdasein 
H. 239 
stock: Bestand 
stop: *aufhören; etc. 
H. 244f, 329f 
tstream: *Strom; *Fluss 
But cf. Ausfluss (effluence, H. 291) 
stream of Experiences: H. 194, 344, 
88 


3 
stream of ‘‘nows”’: H. 410, 422, 426 
stream of time: H. 426, 432 
tstretch, stretch along: Strecke, ers- 
trecken 
H. 23, 106, 371, 373-375, 390f, 4098, 
417f, 423 - 
structure, structural: *Struktur, *struk- 
tural 


569 


But cf. structural element (*Auf- 
bauelement, H. 334); sub- 
structure (*Unterbau, H. 210; 
*Substruktion, H. 241 

fas-structure: *Als-struktur, *Struk- 
tur des Als 

H. 149, 151, 154, 158, 359f 

tcare-structure, structure of: care: 
*Sorgestruktur 

H. 196, 259, 317, 323, 328, 3318, 

346, 350 
fend-structure: *Ende-struktur 

H. 244, 246 

fore-structure 

(See our entry above.) 

Ttemporalization-structure: 
gungsstruktur 

H. 332 

fworld-structure: *Weltstruktur 
H. 366, 414 
structure of Being, Being-structure: 
*Seinsstruktur 
fstructure of truth: 
struktur 

H. 216, 223, 226 

{structural totality: *Strukturganz- 
heit 

H. 131, 182, 193, 209, 234, 334 

structural whole: *Strukturganze 

H. 65, 131, 180-184 (Section 39), 
ıgıf, 231-233, 236, 252, 316f, 
323-325, 350 © 

See also H. 2-15 (Int. I), especially 
H. 5-8 (Section 2), et passim 

subject (noun), subjective: *Subjekt, 
"subjektiv 

But cf. subject-matter. (See entry 
below). 

(df. H. 46, 60, 114, 126, 204, 227, 
227, 230, 366, 419) 

subject vs. Dasein: H. 60 (Contrast 
H. 229) 

subject vs. Self: H. 303, 322 

subject vs. Object: 

(See Object.) 

subjectivity vs. Objectivity: H. 395, 
405, 411, 419 

isolated subject: H. 118, 179, 188, 
204, 206, 321 

worldless subject: H. ı 10f, 116, 192, 
206, 366 

subjects of Others: H. 119, 121, 123, 
126, 128, 384 

present-at-hand subject: H. 119, 
121, 129, 128, ıgıf, 176, 320 


*Zeiti- 


*Wahrheits- 


570 


subject—coni. 

‘ideal subject’: H. 229 

absolute subject: H. 228, 318 

knowing subject: H. 47, 60 

the ‘subject’ of everydayness; H. 114, 
128 

‘factual’ subject: H. 229 

factical subject: H. 229 

‘theoretical subject’: H. 316 

‘historical’ subject: H. 382 

‘logical subject’: H. 319 (Kant) 

subject vs. predicate: H. 154f, 318f 

the a priori and the subject: H. 229 
(Cf. H. 110) 

truth and the subject: H. 227, 229 

time and the subject: H. 419 

the world and the subject: H. 62, 
109f, 164 (See also worldless 
subject.) 

subjectivity of the subject: H. 24 

‘subjectivity’ of the world: H. 65, 
66 


3 

‘subjectivity’ of time: H. 419, 427 

‘subjectivity’ of world-time: H. 419 

Kant on the subject: H. 24, 109, 204, 
319-321 

subject-matter: sach- 

(Note: this expression has been used only 
in translating the words ‘sach- 
ar ‘Sachgebiet’, and *"Sach- 


tsubjectum: *Subjektum; *subjectum 
H. 46, 114, 319, 322 
Tsubmit, submission: anweisen, *An- 
gewiesenheit; Sichstellen unter 
(H. 74) 
(fin. H. 87) 
H. 87, 137, 139, 161, 297, 348, 383, 
412 
tsubsist, subsistence: bestehen, Be- 
stand 
( fin. H. 303) 
H. 7, 153, 216, 272 n. vi, 284, 288, 
303, 333, 348, 352, 420, 430 
o entries for ‘Self-subsistence’ 
and ‘self-subststent’ above.) 
substance, substantial, substantiality: 
*Substanz, *substantial, *sub- 
stantiell, *Substantialitat 


(See 


But cf. substantiation (Bewäh- 
rung, H. 209) 
(fin. H. 25, 9) (df. H. 87, 8of, 


92, 94, 318 
H. 22, 46f, 63, 68, 87-90, 92-96, 98, 
100, 114, 117, 201, 212, 303, 


Being and Time 


> 
314, 317-323, 320 n. xix, 39%, 


435 
substantial Being: H. 47, 87f 
substantiality as basic attribute of, 
Being: H. 20: D 
ontology of the substantial: H. 319, 
320 n. Xix 


rN, 
wae? 


rma 
substance and subject: H. 2, 317, 321, 


332 
substance and Self: H. 114, 303, 317) ` 


320 n. xix, 32 


3, 332 
substance and the “I”: H. 317f, 320, - 


322 
substance and person: H. 47, 320 n. ' 


xix 
substance and spirit: H. 117 


substantiality and Dasein’s subsist-™ 


ence: H. 303 
soul-substance: H. 46, 114, 318 
man’s substance: H. 117b, 212, 314 
substance and world: H. 90, 94, 96 
corporeal substance: H. 90, 92 
substance and the present-at-hand: 
H. 114, 318 
substantiality and Reality: H. 212 
substance and function: H. 88+. 
Descartes on substance: H. go, 92- 
96, 98, 100 
Kant on substantiality: H. 318-323 
Scheler on substances, ete.: H. 47 
tsuccession, successive: *Nacheinander; 
*Sukzession (H. 432, n. xxx); 
*Sich-jagen (H. 322) 
*Nacheinander: H. 242, 291, 350, 
374, 422, 426, 430 
tsuicide: *Selbstmord 
H. 229 
sum, summation, summative: *Summe, 
*Summierung, *summativ 
H. 125-127, 187, 210, 242-244, 244 N. 
iii, 370, 374 
fsummon: *Aufruf, *aufrufen 
um H. 269, 273) 
H. 269, 273-275, 277, 279f, 287, 
289f, 292, 294-296, 299f, 313, 
317 
tsun: *Sonne 
But cf. sunrise (Aufgang, H. 103, 
413); sunset (Niedergang H. 
413). Cf. also sonnenklar (clarity, 
H. 2 


H. 71, 103, 412f, 415f, 432 N. xxx 
(Hegel) 
superficial: äusserlich . 
(fin. H. 339) 


è 


Index of English Expressions 


superior: tiberlegen (adj.) 
But cf. superior power (*Übermacht, 
H. 384f). Cf. also the verb 
‘überlegen’ (‘to deliberate’). 
H. 254, 258 
fsupra-temporal: überzeitlich 
H. 18, 395 
tsurmise: *ahnen 
H. 173f, 219 
surmount: überwinden 
surprise: verwundern (amaze, H. 172); 
überraschen (H. 355) 
fsurrender: *ausliefern 


H. 128, 198f, 144, 178, 185, 199, 


2 
survey: Übersicht, übersehen (over- 
look; etc.) 
H. 79, 315, 359 
symbol: *Symbol 
H. 29, 77f, 163 
symptom: Anzeichen (*betoken, H. 
185); *Symptom (H. 29) 
But cf. symptom of a disease (Krank- 
heitserscheinung, H. 29) 
(fin. H. 29) 
H 80 


. 78, 
synthesis: *Synthesis, *Synthese 
H. 33f, 117, 1598, 178, 430 (Hegel) 
(Note: see also ovvOeots.) 
system: *System 
H. 36, 87f, 159, et passim 
tacit: unausdrücklich (unexpressed, 
not explicit, ei.); unausges- 
prochen (unexpressed); *still- 
schweigend 


take account 
(See entry on ‘take into one’s reckoning’ 
under ‘reckon’ above.) 
take action: handeln 
H. 69, 174, 176, 288, 294f, 300, 302, 
310, 319, 326 
(Note: this list also includes passages in 
which ‘handeln’ is translated by 
‘action’ or some other form of the 
verb ‘act’.) 
ttake along: mitnehmen 
H. 108, 172, 268, 273, 345, 348, 369 
(Note: this list also includes those pas- 
sages in which ‘mitnehmen? has 
been translated as ‘carry along’.) 
take apart: auseinanderlegen; *ausein- 
andernehmen (H. 159) 
fir. H. 149) 
H. 149 


571 
take back: *zurücknehmen, *Zurück- 
nahme 
( fin. H. 308, 344) 
H. 308, 332, 244, 370, 436, et passim 
take : Kenntnis nehmen, 
Kenntnisnahme 
But cf. cognize, omen (erkennen, 
Erkenntnis). 
ttake the ii cut: *anschneiden (H. 
150 
in H. 150) 
in: einnehmen: aufnehmen (H. 


428) 
But E take in advance (vorwegneh- 
men, H. 264) 
(fin. H. 368) 
H. 368 


take into one’s reckoning 

(See entry under ‘reckon’ above.), 
take over: übernehmen, Übernahme 
ftake a rest: ausruhen 

H. 57, 172, 193 

e time 

(See time.) 


(See discourse.) 
ttarry: *verweilen 
H. 61, 120, 138, 172, 220, 238, 346f, 
8 


35 
ftear (verb): reissen 
H. 142, 173f, 178, 193, 222, 296, 
238, 263, 348, 351, 383f 
(Note: thts list includes all passages in 
which ‘reissen? and its compounds 
appear, though they are often 
translated by ‘snatch’, ‘drag’, or 
‘wrench’ rather than by ‘tear’.) 
tTemporal, Temporality: *temporal, 
*Temporalitat 
(fin. H. 17, 231) 
H. 19, 23-26, 39f, 147 
temporal, temporality: *zeitlich, *Zeit- 
lichkeit 
But cf. temporal attribute, temporal 
character (*Zeitbestimmtheit) ; 
temporal stage (*Zeitstufe, H. 


349) 

( fin. HL 17, 304) (df. H. 17f, 234f, 
326, 329, 331, 333f, 338 n. ili, 
350, 367, 396, 405, 420, 426, 
436) 

A. 17-19, 21, 39, 41, 199, 204, 231- 
437 (Division II; see Table of 
Contents.) 


572 


ize: zeitigen 

(fin. H. 235, 304) (df. H. 235, 304, 
328, 365) 

Fi. 22, 122, 152, 178, 235, 304, 328- 
340, 342, 344, 348-350, 252-355, 
365f, 375f, 381, 388, 395-397, 
405-416, 420f, 425-427, 436f 

(This list includes, in its first Four items, 
the passages in which “zeitigen’ has 
been translated as ‘bring about’ or 
**bring to maturity’.) 


tempt: versuchen (try; attempt; efc.); 


ete. 
H. 177f, 180, 253f, 330, 347 
Ttense (adj.): gespannt 
(fin. H. 409) 


: 374 
{tense (noun): * Tempus 
H. 


tterror: * intsetzen 
H. 142 
testimony: Zeugnis 
(fin. H. 256) 
tthe “that-it-is”: *das Dass 
(fin. H. 135) 
H. 135f, 276, 284, 340, 343 _ 
tthe ‘that it is’: *das “Dass es ist” 
But cf. the fact that it is (*Dass-sein, 
H. 5, 7, 14) 
(fin. H. 135) 
H. 194f 
tthe ‘that ı: is and has to be’: *das 
“Dass es ist und zu sein hat” 
H. 134f, 276, 284 
tthe ‘that it is there’: *das “‘dass-es-da- 
ist’? 
H. 265 
theme, thematic, thematize: *Thema, 
er *thematisieren 
(fin. H. 2) (df. H. 363) 
H. 2, 4, 9, 31, 41-45 (Section 9), 
67-69, 74-76, 83, 111f, 124, 130- 
134 (Section 28), 145, 149, 
238f, 354, 362-365, 376, 393- 
397; 423, et passim 
the “then”: *das Dann 
(fin. H. 406) 
H. 406-414, 421f, 427 
tthe “thence”: *das Dorther 
H. 369 
ttheology: *Theologie 
H. 10, 28, 34, 48f, 139, 190 n. iv, 
229, 248, 249 n. vi, 269, 272 n. 
vi, 290, 306 n. 2 


Being and Time 


theoretical, theory: ‘*theoretisch, 
Theorie 
(fin. H. 69) (df. H. 69, 138, 356ff) 
H. 59, 67, 69, 81, 136, 138, 157f, 
166, 193, 199, 248, 251, 2571, 
261, 300, 312, 315f, 320 n. xix, 
335, 351f, 356-364 (Section 
69b), et passim) 
(Note: for ‘theory of judgment’, ‘theory 
` of relativity’, etc., see entries for 
‘judgment’, ‘relativity’, etc. But for 
‘theory of knowledge’, see ‘episte- 
mology’.) 
the “there”: *das Da 
(fin. H. 135, 239) (df. H. 119, 132, 
133, 135, 142f, 145, 160, 296f, 
350, 364) 
H. 75, 102, 119, 132f, 134-166 (I, 
V, A). 166-180 (I, V, B), 220f, 
237, 263, 265, 270, 276, 284, 
296-300, 311, 326, 334-336, 
339, 343, 347-350, 364, 366, 
382, 385, 391, 406, 408, 410, 
412f, 415 
(Note: cf. also H. 74, 83, 126f, 186, 
189, 195, 238, 328, 365, 389, 
434 (Hegel)). See also 
entries for ‘Being-there’, ‘have- 
been-there’, ‘no-longer-Being-there’.) 
there is: es gibt; ete. 
. (fin. H. 212, 412) 
the ‘there is’: H. 7, 228 
“There is’ something ready-to-hand: 


H. 71 
‘There is’ a world: H. 72 
‘There is’ Being: H. 212, 230, 316 
‘There is’ truth: H. 214, 226, 228, 
‘There is’ time: H. qııf. 
there-with-us: *mit-da- 
H. 130, 250 
(Note: cf. also ‘Dasein-with’.) 
the “they”; *das Man; etc. 
(fin. H. 113, 129, 253) (df. H. 114, 
126-130, 138, 252, 391, ek.), 
publicness of the “they”: H. 138, 188, 
190, 192, 252f, 271, 277 
common sense of the “they”: H. 
260, 288, 292, 296, 309, 312, 
387, 395 
the way things have been interpreted 
by the “they”: H. 190, 252, 
258, 273, 309, 331 
idle talk of the “they”: H. 174, 252, 
255, 2776, 296 


Index of English Expressions 
think: denken; etc. 


the “they”’—cont. 

ambiguity of the “they”: H. 174 

tranquillization by the “they”: H. 
177, 195, 254 

Being-with-one-another in 
“they”: H. 175 

the Dasein-with of Others in the 
“they”: H. 176 

everyday Being-one’s-Self and the 
“they”: H. 126-130 (Section 
27), 252 

inauthentic Being (or existence) in 
the “they”: H. 178f, 367 

authentic Being-one’s-Self as a modi- 
fication of the “they”: H. 267f, 
277 

absorption in the “they”: H. 
184, 189, 222, 270, 315 

lostness in the “they”: H. 175, 177, 
189, 253. 268, 271, 274, 287, 
259, 2 97, 299, 3076 353, 390 

listening away i9 the “they”: H. 271 

fleeing into the ae H. 322 


the 


167, 


4 


falling and the ney”: H. 135, 180, 
2775 287 > 33 33 
the they” oe Pees 991 


the “they” s determining one’s 
state-of-:ntu.d: H. 170; 177, 254 
passing over the “they”: H. 273 
the “they” and the call: H. 236 
the “they” and resoluteness: H. 299, 


307 
the “they” and tire Situation: H. 300 
the “they” and repetition: H. 391 
the “they”? and death: H. 252-255, 
257, 263, 266, 424f. 
the “hey” and time: H. 411, 425 
(See also: H. 167, 193, 224, 278, 
298, 318.) 
Tthey-self: *Man-selbst 
(fin. H. 129, 287, 322) 
H. 129, 181, 193, 263, 266-268, 271- 
274, 276-278, 280, 288, 299, 
311, 317, 322, 337, 391 
Thing, Thinghood: *Ding, *Dinglich- 
keit 
H. 46-49, 54, 63f, 67-69, 73f, 79-83, 
gof, 96-100, 114, 121, 124, 
2031, ef passim 
tning, thinghood:: Sache, *Sachheit; etc. 
(fin. H. 27) 
the things themselves: 
selbst 
H. 9, 27, 34, 38 n, va 95, 158, 
166, 213, 219, 256, 358 


*die Sachen 


573 


‘I think’: H. 24, 319-321, 427 

thinking as diavoeiv: H. 96 

pure thinking: H. 88 

thinking as a derivative from under- 
standing: H. 147 


Relations as merely ‘something 
thought’: H. 87f 

thinking about death: H. 254, 257f, 
261, 309 


thinking to the end: H. 305, 424 
(See also H. 62, et passim.) 
tthe this-worldly: *das Diesseits 
H. 248 
Tthe “thither”: 
RA. 111, 368 
Tthrall to: *hörig 
H. 163, 287 
Tthreaten, threat: *bedrohen, *drohen 
idf. 32. 140, 143, 253, 34, 343) 
beholding and the threatening: H. 
138 
fear and the threatening: H. 
140-142, 185i, 24! 
anxiety and the threatening: E. i86f, 
189, 265, 277, 343 
uncanniness and the threatening: 
H. 189, 277 
(Sze also Fi. 241.) 
throw, thrownness: *werfen, *Geworf- 
enheit, *Wurf 
(fin. H. 135, 145) (df. H. 135, 179, 
221, 276, 277, 284, 285, 348, 
364) 
thrownness into existence: H. 276 
thrownness into the “there”: H. 136, 
148, 265, 284, 297, 413 
thrownness into a world: H. 192, 
228, 348, 383, 406, 413 
thrownness into uncanniness: H, 
343 
thrownness into indefiniteness: 
H. 298, 308 
thrownness into the possibility of 
death: H. 251 


“das Dorthii: 


137; 


thrownness into Being-towards- 
death: H. 348 

thrownness into death: H. 251, 256, 
308, 329 


throwness into the “nothing”: H. 277n 

thrown Being-in-the-world: H. 161, 
181, 189, ıgıf, 259, 383 

thrown Being-with-one-another: H. 
175 


574 


throw-~<¢ont. 


thrown Being-towards-the-end: H. 
251 

thre. ı Being-t-wards-death: H. : .4, 
EN 
PEN DB FR 7 

th: own has... i. 284, 287, Er ee 

thmun in ivilualization: ’ >e 


43 

thr wo pus#bility: H. 1445 

threwn putentiality-for-Bei: ;:: 
:88, 359 

thrown  potentiality-for-Bein::-. 2 
world: H. 192, 252 

thr...:aness and facticity: H. i=: 
179, 221, 276, 284, 328, 748, 
410, 414, 436 ae 

thrownness and everydayness: H. 1:-7 

thrownness and disclosedness: H. 2213, 
276, 415 

thrownness and falling: H. 179, 415; 
424 

thre vnness and turbulence: H. 179 

thrcvmness and abandonment: H. 
347, 365, 406, 413 

cwnness and mood, state-of-mind, 

etc.: H. 135f, 139, 144, 179, 181, 
251, 270, 276, 328, 340, 365 

thrownness and fear: H. 342 

thrownness and anxiety: H. 187, 191, 
251, 343f 

ownness and addiction and urge: 

H. 196 

thrownness and care: H. 383, 406, 
412 

thrownness and projection: H. 145, 
138, 195, 199, 223, 285, 336, 406 

thrownness and conscience: H. 291 

thrownness and Being-towards-death : 
H. 344, 348, 374 

thrownness and freedom: H. 366 

thrownness and having-been: H. 328, 
340, 345, 385, 996 

thrownness and time-reckoning: H. 
412f 

taking over one’s thrownness: H. 383, 
385 

coming back behind’ one’s thrown- 
ness: H. 284, 383 

throwing against: *entgegenwerfen: 
H. 363 

tie up: festmachen; klammern (H. 274) 

H. 123, 151, 192, 414 


time: *Zeit; etc. 


(fin. H. 329, 408) (df. H. 329, 408, 
421, 423, 431-434) 


Being and Time 


time as the horizon for the under- 
standing or interpretation of 
Being: H. 1, 17, 39, 41, 235, 437 

the ordinary way of understanding or 
interpreting time: H. 18, «35, 
204, 326, 328f, 338n. iii, 462- 
437 (II, VI; esp. Section St, 

the traditional conception of time. 


H. 18, 24, 235, 349, 428, 432, 
XXX 


the everyday experience of time: 
H. 333, 405, 420 

primordial and derivative time: H. 
329-332, 495, 426, 436 

time and care: H. 235, 327, 424 

time and the “they”: H. 425 

time and idle talk: H. 174 

time and reticence: H. 174 

time and space: (See entry under 
‘space’) 

time and history: i]. 379, 404f 

time and spirit: H. 405f, 428-436 
(Section 82), 427 

allowing time: *Zeit lassen: H. 404, 
409f, 414 

assigning time: *Zeit angeben, *Zeit- 
angabe: H. 408-410, 413, 418, 

„422 

counting time: Zeit zählen: H. 421f 

dating time: H. 408f, 412f, 415, 417, 

22 

sas time: *Zeit aussprechen: 
H. 408, 411, 421f (Cf. also H. 
406f, 410) 

giving the time: *Zeit geben: H. 
412f, 420, 422, 432 n. xxx 

having time: *Zeit haben: H. 404, 
40gf, 418f, 422, 425 

interpreting time: H. 407-414 

levelling off time: H. 329, 405, 422, 
424-426, 431f, 432 N. xxx, 435 

losing time: H. 404, 410, 418, 425 

measuring time: *Zeitmessung, 
*Zeitmass: H. 71, 413-419, 
417 n. iv, 422 

reading off the time: Zeit ablesen 
(*tell time, H. 70): H. 415-417 

spanning time: (See span.) 

taking time, taking one’s time: 
*sich Zeit nehmen: H. 4046 
410-413, 416, 418, 421, 424f 
(See also eniry for “taking time into 
one’s reckoning’ below.) 

telling time: (See reading off the 
time.) 


Index of English Expressions 


time—cont. 

using time (*Zeit brauchen): H. 235, 
333, 409 

concern with time: H. 406-420 
(Sections 79, 80), 422 (Cf. also 

. H. 333.) 

time-reckoning: H. 235, 333, 41ıf, 
414-418 n. v 


reckoning with time: H. 235, 333, 
371, 404, 411-413, 422 

taking time into one’s reckoning: 
H. 371, 404f, 411, 413 

‘time goes on’: H. 330, 425 

‘time passes away’: H. 330, 425f 

time as finite, endless, in-finite: 
H. 330f, 424-426 

time as continuous: H. 423 

time as irreversible: H. 426 

stream of time: H. 426, 432 

course of time: *Lauf der Zeit (H. 
422); *Zeitverlauf (H. 400); 
*Kreislauf der Zeit (H. 432 n. 
xxx); mit der Zeit (H. 328) 

point of time: *Zeitpunkt: H. 374, 


407 
earlier time: H. 378, 419 
‘past’ time: H. 380 
‘fugitive’ time: H. 425 
‘qualitative’ time: H. 333 
‘psychical’ time: H. 349 
‘subjective’ or ‘Objective’ time: H. 
326, 405, 411, 419, 427 
‘immanent’ or ‘transcendent’ time: 


H. 326, 419 
‘time for ...’: *“Zeit zu... .’: H. 
412, 414 
‘wrong time for .. .’: *Unzeit für 
7: H. 414 


at the time: jeweilig, jeweils; etc. 
in time: in der Zeit: H. 18f, 204, 330, 


338, 338 n. iii, 340f, 349, 355, 
367, 3730, 376, 379, 38ıf, 
š 404f, 412, 419f, 425, 428, 435 
within time, within-time-ness: *in- 
nerzeitig, *Innerzeitigkeit 


H. 235, 333, 338, 338 n. tii, 349, 


3775 404-437 (II, V 
timeless: *zeitlos: H. 18, 156, 382 


now-time: *Jetzt-Zeit: H. 421, 423, 
426 
world-time: *Weltzeit: 
(df. H. 414, 419, 420, 422) 
H. 405f, 414, 417, 417 n. iv, v; 
419-423, 426-428, 428-436 (Sec- 
tion 82) 


575 


Aristotle on time: H. 26, 40, 42, 427, 
427 N. XIV, 432 N. XXX 
Augustine on time: H. 427, 427 n. xv 
Bergson on time: H. 18, 26, 333, 432 D. 
XXX 
Hegel on time: H. 405f, 427, 423-436 
(Section 82), H. 432 n. xxx 
Hyginus on time: H. 198 
Kierkegaard on time: H. 338 n. ili 
Plato on time: H. 423 
the Being of time: H. 406, 419, 431 
(Note: the word ‘time’ has also been 
used in a few stereotyped phrases to 
translate some other expressions tn 
which ir does not appear.) 
the “to”: das auf. 
(fin. H. 329) 
to be: *Zu-sein 
H. 42 
fto hand: *zur Hand 
H. 73, 102, 105 
But cf. ready-to-hand (*zuhanden) 
to-day: heute 
H. 371, 378, 381, 386, 391, 397, 407, 


4 
together: 
etc, 
H. 33, 55f, 159, 204-206, 242-244, 390, 
et passim 
tomorrow: *morgen, *das Morgige 
H. 371 
the “too”; 
H. 118 
tool: Werkzeug (equipment for work- 
ing, H. 68 
H. 69, 73f, 157, 354f, 361 
totality: *Ganzheit; Ganze (whole); 
das All (H. 9, 14, 64); Gesam- 
theit (H. 28) 
But cf. total (*total) 
( fin. H. 236) 
totality of Being-in-the-world: H. 231 
totality of care: H. 193f, 196, 317, 
324, 374 
totality of Dasein: H. 234, 237-240, 
241-246 (Section 48), 249, 265, 
309f, 316, 323, 373, 437 
totality of Dasein’s Being: H. 182, 
230, 232f, 236, 265, 323, 327, 
6 


zusammen; *beisammen; 


das “Auch” 


4 

ale of Dasein’s potentiality-for- 
Being: H. 266 

totality of Dasein’s structural whole: 
H. 180-184 (Section 39), ıgıf, 


233, 236, 253, 317, 323f 


576 


ttotality of entities: das All des Seienden 
H. 9, 14, 64, 241, 248 
(Note: this list also includes the 
passages in which this expression 
has been translated as ‘the agere- 
gate of entities’.) 

totality of equipment, equipmental 
totality: H. 68f, 76, 79-82, 103f, 
112, 352-354, 361, 369 

totality of historizing: H. 390 

totality of involvements: H. 84f, 87, 
100, 104, t10f, 129, 144, 149f, 
158, 186, 210, 297, 359, 364 

totality of places: H. 102f, 113 

totality of resoluteness: H. 383 

totality of signification: H. 161 

totality of temporalizing: H. 406 

totality of words: H. 161 

constitutive totality: H. 374 

equipmental totality: (See totality of 
equipment.) 

referential totality: *Verweisungs- 
ganzheit, * Verweisungsganze 

( fin. H. 70) 

H. 70, 75f, 82, 111, 192, 210 
relational totality: H. 87, 215f 
structural totality: H. 131, 182, 193, 

209, 234, 334 l 

tlack of totality: * Unganzheit 

H. 236, 242, 244, 259 
totality-structure: H. 246 

(Note: for ‘Ganze’, see also H. 11, 

75, 168, 216, 232, 363.) 
touch: *berühren; *rühren; *anrühren 
(H. 2) 

But cf. feel one’s way by touch (be- 
tasten, H. gı, 97); feel the 
touch of (betasten, H. 107); 
sense of touch (*Tastsinn, gı) 

H. 55, 91, 93, 97, 137, 346, et passim 

towards: zu; gegen; entgegen; etc. 
das zu... (*the “towards’’) 

(Jin. H. 329) 
das Dazu (*the “‘towards-this”’) 

(Jin. H. 78) 

H. 74, 84, 86f, 360, 364 
das Hin-zu: H. 195 
das Wozu (*the “towards-which”’; 

“for-which””) | 

(fin. H. 78, 84, 414) 

H. 70, 78, 82-84, 86, 353, 355, 

360, 364 (CJ. H. 250.) 
das Auf-sich-zu (*the “towards- 
oneself”) 
But of. towards oneself (zu sich 


Being and Time 


selbst, H. 124); towards itself 
(zu ihm selbst, H. 252) 
(fin. H. 329) 
H. 326, 328, 330 
zur Welt (towards the world) 
But cf. towards the world as a 
whole (weltanschaulich, H. 47) 
H. 60-62 
(See also Being towards.) 
gegen: H. 255 
(fin. H. 255) 
entgegen: H. 243 


traditional, tradition: *traditionell, 
*Tradition: überliefern; über- 
komnen 


traditional conception of time: H. 18, 
235, 349, 428, 432 n. xxx 

traditional conception of truth: H. 
214-226 (Sections 44 a, b) 

traditional ontology: H. 22, 25-27, 
54, 65, 96, ggf, 147, 403 

(See also H. orf, et passim. Cf. also 
our entries for ‘come down’ and 
‘hand down.) 
ttranquillity, tranquillize, tranquil: 
*beruhigen; Ruhe (H. 254, 
430); *ruhig (H. 138, 430) 

H. 177f, 180, 188f, 195, 253f, 292, 

311, 347f, 400, 437 

ttranscendence, transcendent, trans- 
cend: *Transzendenz, *trans- 
zendent, *transzendieren; *üb- 
ersteigen (H. 3, 153) 

H. 38, 49, 61, 153, 201f, 326, 335, 
350-367 (Section 69, esp. H. 
364-366), 389, 419 

(Note: see also the entry for ‘transcen- 
dens, transcendentia’ in the Index of 
Latin Expresstons.) 

ttranscendental: *transzendental 

H. 3, 11, 24, 31, 39, 41, 96, 199, 
208, 215, 319, 319 n. xiv 

(Note: see also the entry for ‘transcend- 
entalis’ in the Index of Latin 
Expressions.) 

ttransience: .* Verganglichkeit 
(fin. H. 380) 
.380 
ttransition: Übergang, übergehen 
But cf. ttransitive (*transitiv, H. 105) 
H. 237, 240, 429, 431 : 
ttransmit: *übergeben; *übermitteln 
(H. 51); *vermitteln (H. 300) 
(fin. H. 21) 
H. 20f 


Index of English Expressions 577 


ttransmute: aufheben (cancel out, 
H. 401, 405; do away with, 
H. 332; raise to a new level, 
H. 25) 
H. 430 (Hegel) 
transparent: *durchsichtig 
(fin. H. 5) (df. H. 146. Cf. also H. 298, 
307, et passim) 
true, truth: *wahr, *Wahrheit; *get- 
reu Nr 429); ele. 
(fin. H. 33, 256) (df. H. 33, 212- 
l 225, 256, 397) 
Being and truth: H. 183, 213, 227, 


230, 349, 357, 420 
Being of truth: H. 226-230 (Section 


44c 

Being-true! H. 33, 218-220, 226f 

Being-in-the-truth, in the truth: 
H. ath, Ci 226f, 229, 256, 264, 
298, 36 

Dasein, seinen: and truth: 
H. 184, 212-230 (Section 44) 

truth of assertion: H. 154, 218, 223, 
225, 228 

truth of judgment: H. 33f, 225, 297 

truth of the Adyos: H. 33, 219, 225 

truth of knowledge: H. 46f 

truth of pure beholding: H. 171 

truth of voeiw: H. 33, 171 

truth of sensory perception (alodnoıs) 
H. 


33 

truth of the present-at-hand: H. 264 

truth of Newton’s laws: H. 226f 

truth of existence: H. 221, 297, 307, 
397 

truth as agreement: H. 33, 214-225 

truth as validity: H. 357 

truth as uncovering and Leing- 
uncovering: H. 218-220, 225- 
227 

truth as uncoveredness and Being- 
uncovered: H, 219f, 222, 224f, 
256 

truth as Being-disclosive: H. 256 

truth as disclosedness: H. 221, 223, 
225, 264f, 207, 397 

Due ae sical truth: H. 38 

primordial truth: H. 33, 214, 219- 


~ 


2.0 00 44b), 297, 307, 
authe, : tru H. 297-255, 302, 
existential trur . iz. 316 


existentiell truth: H. 316 
‘eternal’ truth: H. 227, 229 


‘subjective’ truth: H. 227 

‘universal’ truth: H. 227 

presupposing truth: H. 226-230 
(Section 44c) 

Maintaining oneself in the truth: 
H. 256, 264, 298 

holding for true: (See entry for this 
exbression above.) 

truth and certainty: H. 264, 362 

“There is truth.’: H. 226-228, 316 

true propositions, and science: H. 11, 
357 

truth-claims: H. 256 

untruth: (See entry for this expression 
below.) 

pre-ontological conception of truth: 
H. 225 

traditional conception of truth: 
H. 214-226 (Section 44a, b) 

Greek conception of truth: H. 33f, 
219, 222 

Heracleitus on truth: H. 219 

Parmenides on truth: H. 222 

Aristotle on truth: H. 33, 214, 219, 


225f 
Thomas Aguinas on truth: H. 214 
Kant on truth: H. 215 
Hegel on truth: H. 429, 431 
Yorck on truth: H. 402f 
tturbulence: *Wirbel, *hineinwirbeln 
H. 178f 
turn away: *Abkehr, *abkehren; *ab- 
wenden (H. 355, 425), ete. 
H. ı33f, 163, 184-186, 189, 340 
turn back: *rückwenden; ete. 
H. 136 
turn round: *unwenden 
H. 136, 217 
tturn thither: *Hinkehr, *hinkehren 
H. 185f, 340 
tturn towards: *A° sehr, *ankehren 
H. 135 
ttypology: *Tvnolog'e 


H. 178, 247. 220 
un- (Import: Te , which words 
intro 2 Oy k hx occur are 
ususi.: Pea ‘ ihe headings 
for tk: ds E the prefix ıs 
alae u 
funcanny: * 27 oi 
( fin. H. 168) 


H. 170, 188-190, 197, 252, 276-278, 
280, 286f, 259, 295f, 342-344 


578 


uncover: entdecken; aufdecken; un- 
‚verdeckt (H. 23, Kant) 
(fia. H. 33, 218) 

entdecken: 

uncovering of Being: H. 171, 212, 
357 

uncovering of entities: H. 6, 14, 33, 
58, 65, 70-72, 81, 85, 88, 112, 
151, 168, 183, 210, 212, 351, 
356f, 362f, 366, 389, 413, 420 

uncovering of Dasein: H. 105 

uncovering of the ready-to-hand: 
H. 69, 73, 104, 123, 144, 172, 
333, 408 

uncovering of the present-at-hand: 
H. 73, 158, 333, 356-364 (Sec- 
tion 6gb) 

uncovering of phenomena: H. 36 

uncovering ofa fact: H. 336 

uncovering of the things themselves: 
H. 358 

uncovering of a world: H. 62, 129, 
738, 165, 194 

uncovering of a ‘world’: H. 
129, 203, 297, 312, 412 

uncovering of the with-world: H. 129 

uncovesing of a number of ‘subjecis*: 
H. 125 

uncovering of the work-world : H. 172 

uncever:ng of the environment: H. 
70f, 413 

uncovering of that with which one 
concerns oneself: H. 365 

uncoveriug of equipment: H. 69, 79, 
Br, 352 

wicevert.g of the unusability cf 
equipment: H. 73 

uncovering of the damaging of a 
toot; H. a5af 

uncovering of the manipulability of 
a nammer: H. 34f 

casgen of the south wind: H. 51 

macaw iy of invorwersents! H. 85, 
372, 207, 300 

uncovering of tefcrential contexts: 
H. 71, 75 

uncovering of Nature: H. 63, 7of, 
412f, 415, 417 N. iv 

uncovering of remoteness: H. 105 

uncovering of a “yonder”: H. 417 

uncovering of spece: H. 104, 108, 

$ 110-113, 367, 369 

uncovering of extensio: H. 95 

uncovering of regions: H. 104, 107, 
3111, 368f 


210, 


Being and Time 


uncovering of resistance: H. 


375 
210 
uncovering of possibilities: H. ::2, 
342 


uncovering of time: H. 333 
uncovering of a clock: H. 413 
uncovering of what is drawing close: 
H. 141 a 
uncovering of something threaien- 
ing: H. 341 
circumspective uncovering: H. 7 
104, 106, 108, 123, 148, 172, 
364 
theoretical uncovering: H. 358 (Cf 
also H. 351, 363) 
uncovering and meaning: H. 147 
uncovering and saying: H. 169 
uncovering and truth: H, 218-2cf., 
256 
Being-uncovering: H. 218-229, v24, 
228 
Being-unco: ered: H. 218, 220 
(Nete: tus list also includes this 
principal passages in which ‘eni- 
decken’ fas bem translated «s 
‘discover’.) 
taufdecker: H. 37, 43, 76, 171, 267, 
3435 432 7. Or 
(Note: sty list also includes t's 
passages in which ‘aufdecken’ hax 
heen ivanslaied as ‘expose’.) 
understand, understanding: *verste- 
hen, *"yrständnis, Verstand 
(Ar. Fi. £493, 151) (df. H. ı23, 
133%, 172, 263, 288, 295f, 311, 
336-330. 350, 387) 
H. 1, 4, :2, 20-22, 53, 58, 95-87. 
125-1275. 139, 142-153 (Sections 
31, 32), Sch, 170, 1738, 178, 
189, 207°, 212, 222, 225, 231, 
298, 252, 200, 272, 279, 28. 
alg (Section 58), 295f, go4, 33: 
336-339 (Section 682), 340, 350, 
361-364, 378-982 (Section 79), 
421, 437, et passim 
give to understand: (See entry fer this 
expression above.) 
undifferentiated 
(See Indifferent.) 
unity, unitary, united: *Einheit, *ein- 
heitlich 
unity of analogy: H. 3 
unity of Being-in-the-world: H. 53, 
351 


Index of English Expressions 


unity—ont. 
unity of Being-outside-of-itself: H. 
430 (Hegel) 
unity of care: H. 
351 i 
unity of Dasein’s constitution: H. 200 
unity of Dasein’s existential structure: 
H. 351 
unity of Experiences: H. 390 
unity of horizontal schemata: H. 365 
unity of the “I”: H. 433 (Hegel) 
unity of living-through: H. 47 
(Scheler) 
unity of meaning: H. 48 (Scheler) 
unity of Nature: H. 1 
unity of the person: H. 47f (Scheler) 
unity of projection: H. 407 
unity of relations: H. 354 
unity of significance: H. 365 
unity of spatiality: H. 104 
unity of the structural whole: H. 
317, 325 
unity of temporality: H. 339f, 365f, 
aba, 408, 423 (See also ecstatical 
unity.) 
unity of temporalizing: H. 354, 427 
unity of the “there’’: H. 366 
unity of Things of Nature: H. 48 
unity of the world: H. 364 
ecstatical unity: 328, 338-340, 342, 
345, 349f, 353, 355, 363 n. 
xxiii, 365, 381, 408, 421, 423 
unity of future and having-been: 
H. 397 _ 
unity of making-present and reten- 
tive awaiting: H. 355, 416 
unity of the ontical and the Hist- 
orical: H. 403 
unity of the reference of service- 
ability and the 
indicating: H. 78 
unity of thrownness anı! 
towards-death: H. 374 
unitary phenomena: H. 53, 131, 31, 
326 
unitary structures: H. 130f, 192 
universal—allgemein (general); *uni- 
versal; etc. 
allgemein: H. 2-4, 156, 177, 251, 
278, 280, 395, 417, 434 (Hegel) 
+ Allgemeingültigkeit: “universal 
validity, *universally valfl char- 
acter 
H. 156, 205 n. xv, 227, 395 
*universal: H. 38f, 178, 395 


181, 316, 327f, 


Beeps 
ont tae 


reference ct 


579 


* Allesvergleichen: *universal com- 
parison: H. 52 
tunivocal: *einsinnig 
H. 93 
tunmanageable: *unhandlich 
But cf. manage (vorstehen; etc.) 
H. 355 
unpresent: (See make unpresent.) 
Tun-ready-to-hand: *unzuhanden 
(Jin. H. 74) 
H. 73f, 242f, 355, 359 
tunsociability: Unumgänglichkeit {in- 
evitable, indispensable, etc.) 


H. 125 
unsuitable: ungeeignet (inappropri- 
ate) 
H. 73, 83, 157, 3556, 414,422 
(Note: this list includes the chief 


passages in which ‘ungeeignet has 
been translated as ‘inappropriate’ .) 
the ‘until-then’; das “bis dahin” 
H. 409 
tuntruth: *Unwahrheit 
H. 222f, 229, 256f, 298f, 308 
unveil: enthüllen; unverhüllt 
the “upon-which”: das Woraufhin 
H. 145, 151, 324f, 365 
(Note: this list also includes a few 
passages in which ‘woraufhin’ has 
been translated as ‘upon which’ or 
"wnereubön’.) 
tuproot: *entwurzeln 
H. 21f, i70, 173, 177, 196, 222 
turge (noun): *Drang; drängen (RP. 


345) Ä 
But cf. urgent (dringlich). 
(fin. H. 182, 194) 
H. 10, 194-196 
urge (verb): drängen; *bedrangen (H. 
196); *eindrängen 
use, make use, put to use, usable, etc.: 
verwenden; gebrauchen cm- 
ploy, H. 25); *Gebrauc! war 
brauchen (need); etc. 

(Jin. H. 333) 

H. 56, 67-70, 74, 83f, 99, «ci, 
144, 235, 333, 352f, 35% e 
passin 

using and manipulating ` zeb- 
rauchen und Hantierer:\ uy. 

_ 65, 192, 352, 357, 359 

using clocks: H. 404, 414-478 „=: 
using signs: H. 79, 81f 
using ime: H. 235, 409 


580 

use—cont. 

using up: *verbrauchen, *auf- 
brauchen: H. 244f, 333 

unusable: *unverwendbar, *un- 


brauchbar: H. 73f, 355 
Thing of use: *Gebrauchsding: H. 99 
tutilitarianism: *Nützlichkeitsmoral 
H. 293 
utilize: verwenden (H. 333); nutzen 
(H. 61); ausnützen (H. 411); 


ete. 
(fin. H. 333) 
utter (verb), utterance: Verlautbarung 
H. 32f, 163-165, 271-273, 277, 296 
utter {ad).) : völlig: schlechthin ; schlech- 
thinnig 
futtermost: äusserst 
H. 250, 255, 259, 262-264, 266, 302f, 
326 


valid, validity: gelten, Geltung; gül- 
tig, Gültigkeit 


(fin. H. 155) 
H. 7,99, 127) 1556 227, 357, 395 
value: Wert; etc 
H. 63, 69, 80, ggf, 150, 152, 227, 
286, 293f 
veil: verhüllen; einhüllen; versch- 


leiern (H. 136) 
tvelocity: Geschwindigkeit 
H. 105) 
H. 91, 97 
tvicissitude: Geschick 
( fin. H. 384) 
H. 16, 19, 379) 
tviolent: gewaltsam (drastic, H. 219) 
H. 183, 287, 311, 313 315, 327 
tvirtuality: *Virtualitä 
H. 401 
vision: (See clear vision, moment of 
vision. ) 
tvitalism: *Vitalismus (H. 10) 
But cf. vital (lebendig, H. 400, 402). 
tvolition: Wollen 
H. 136, 139 
voice: *Stimme 
alien voice: H. 277 
mysterious voice: H. 274 
voice of conscience: H. 268f, 271, 
275, 280, 290-292, 294, 300 
voice of the friend: H. 163 
voice of the “they”: H. 278 
voice which is universally bi 
H. 278 


(speed, 


tthe “w 


Being and Time 


tvolatil’ze: *verflüchtigen 
H. 87f, 117, 177, 420 

tvoluntative: *voluntativ 
H. 210, 210 n. xix 


wait: warten; etc. 
(fin. H. 25, 26, 338) 
H. 262, 337f, et passim 
want: wollen 
wanting to have a conscience: (See 
entry under ‘conscience’ above.) 
twarn: *warnen 
But cf. warning signal (H. 78, 80). 
H. 161, 279, 281, 290, 292, 294 
way of conceiving: Bergrifflichkeit 
the ‘we’: das “wir” 
H. 227f 
tthe we-world: *das Wir-welt 
H. 65 
weak, weakness: *schwach, *Schwäche 
But cf. weaken (*abschwächen). 
H. 251, 254 
twelfare work: Fürsorge 


(fin. H. 121) 


H. 121 
the “what”: das Was 


H. 12, 27, 42, 45, 122, 143, 158, 274 
the “when”: das Wann 


H. 258, 265 
tthe ‘then, when . . ?: *das ‘dann, 
wann ...”: H. 407, 410, 412, 


414 
tthe “whence”: *das Woher 
H. 134-136, 280, 348 
the “where”: das Wo 
H. roaf, 107 
or “whereat”: das Wobei 


. 107 
the “wherein”: das Worin 
H. 30, 65, 76, 80, B6f, 110, 151, 198, 


202 
(Note: this list also includes some 
passages in which ‘das Worin’ or 
‘wortn’ has been translated some- 
what more freely.) 
the eee das Woraus 


H. 70 

(Note: cf. also H. 198.) 

hereupon”: das Woraufhin 
H. 365 
(Note: cf. our entry for ‘the “‘upon- 

which” °.) 
the “whither”: das Wohin 
H. ee 110f, 134-136, 280, 365, 


Index of English Expressions 


the ‘‘who’’: das Wer 
H. 45, 53, 113, 114-117 (Section 25), 
126, 128-1391, 267, 276, 311, 
317, 375 
whole: ganz, Ganze; etc. 
(fin. H. 236) 
the whole of Dasein: H. 181, ıgıf, 
200, 230, 232f, 237-241 (Sec- 
tion 47), 259, 264, 306, 317, 


329, 372f, 436 
the whole of Being-in-the-world: 


H. 41, 137, 152, 180 
the whole of care: H. 221, 30? 
the whole of life: H. 46 
the whole of discourse: H. 163 
the whole of places: H. 48 
the moon as a whole: H. 243 
whole and sum: H. 244 n. iti 
Being-a-whole: *Ganzsein 
H. 234, 235-267 (II, I esp. Section 
46), 301-305 (Section 61), 317, 
325, 331, 372f 
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole: (See 
entry under ‘potentiality-for-Being’ .) 
structural whole: (See entry under 
‘structure’ .) 
(Note: see also totality.) 
Twholeness: *Ganze 
(fin. H. 236) 
H. 236-238, 240 
the “why”: das Warum 
H. 276 
Twill (noun): *Wille 
(fin. Hi. 182) 
H. 136, 182, 209-211, 271, 275 
will (verb): wollen 
(fin. H. 194) 
H. 194f, 210, 290-293 
wish: *Wunsch, *wiinschen 
(fin. H. 182, 194) 
H. 162, 182, 194f 
the ‘with’: das “Mit” (H. 118) 
(fin. H. 84) 
the “‘with-which”: das Womit 
H. 85-88 (Cf. also H. 158, 352f). 
with one another: miteinander (mutu- 
al, H. 155) 
H. 120-127, 129f, 138, 142, 161f, 
164f, 168, 173-175 1775 238- 
240, 252f, 273, 282, 298, 354, 
370: 379, 384, 387f, 410f, 413, 
416, 425 
{Being without one another: *Ohne- 
einandersein 
H. 121 


581 


twith-world: * Mitwelt 
H. 118, 125, 129, 300 
within: innerhalb (in; among, H. 211); 
inner-; das “Innere” (H. 136) 
twithin-the-environment: *inner- 
umweltlich: H. 66, 85 
twithin-space: *innerräumlich: H. 
102 
Twithin-time: (See entry under ‘time’.) 
within-the-world: *innerweltlicn 
(But cf. within the world (*inner- 
halb der Welt); in the world 
(*in der Welt) 
(fin. H. 13) (df. H. 65, 101, 118, 
209, 366) 
H. 65, 72-76 (Section 16), 80, 82- 
88, 95-98, roof, 102-104 (Section 
22), 113, 118, ı86f, 189, 201, 
203, 209, 211, 357, 366, et passim 
word: Wort; etc. 
H. 87, 159, 161, 164, 202, 273, 402 
(Yorck) 
work (noun): *Werk; Arbeit 
But cf. welfare work (Fürsorge, 
H. 121). 
(fin. H. 70) 
"Werk: H. 69f, 352-354, 387-389, 
395; 412 
work (verb); -arbeiten; -wirken; etc. 
work out: ausarbeiten (treat); *her- 
ausarbeiten; *durcharbeiten (H. 
93; auswirken (development, 
H. 96) 
H. 148, 231, ef passim 
work-world, world of work: *Werkwelt 
H. 71, 117, 172, 352 
world: *Welt 
(fin. H. 63) (df. H. 64f, 72, 75. 
364f, 380, 414) 
abandonment to the world: H. 172, 
412 
absorption in the world: H. ı25, 
129f, 172, 192 
Being alongside the world: H. 54, 
119, 146, 194, 277 
Being-already-alongside-the-world: 
H. 61, 109, 277 
Being-in-the-world: (See speçial entry 
above.) 
Being-no-longer-i-‘;.. -world: 1i. 
176, 238, 240 
Being towards the wield: (Ser entry 
under “Being tovc .!s’ above.) 
Being-with-one-another-in-tne- 
world: H. 238f, 384 


582 


world—cons. 


belonging to the world, H. 65, 38: 

concern with the world: H. 61, 199, 
253, 277, ef passim 

discovering the world: H. 55, 129, 
138, 165, 195, 203 

disclosedness of the world: H. 76, 
137, 139, 141, 145f, 186-188, 
202f, 210f, 220, 272, 297, 333; 
364f, 368, 412, 419f 

familiarity with the world: H. 76, 86 

fascination with the world: H. 61 

fleeing the world: H. 254 

getting ‘lived’ by the world: H. 195f 

going-out-of-the-world: H. 238, 240 

having-been-in-the-world: H. 394 

information about the world: H. 152 

interpreting the world: H. 129 

knowing the world: (See eniry for 
‘know the world’ above.) 

letting the world ‘matter’ to one: 
H. 170 

openness to the world: H. 137 

presupposing the world: H. 361, 365 

relations to the world: H. 57 

submitting to the world: H. 137f, 139 

surrendered to the world: H. 199 

thrown into the world: H. 192, 199, 
221, 228, 348, 413 : 

understanding the world: H. :6, 86, 
146, 148, 152, 168, 360 

ambiguity and the worid: H. 173 

anxiety and the world: H. 186-188, 

| 335 3-45 

Dasein-with and the world: H. ı21- 
123, 137 

environment and the world: H. 66, 
101-1193 (I, HI C) 

fear and the world: H. 141 

the present-at-hand and the world: 
H. 57, 130, 369 

Reality and the world: H. 106, 203, 
211 

the ready-to-hand and the world: 
H. 75f, 83, 106, 119, 122, 137 

resoluteness and the world: H. 298f 

significance and the world: H. 111, 
144f, 147, 151, 166, 186, 297, 
335» 343, 366, 423 

Sagar or: the world: H. 101-113 

_ (1, HIC), 369 

Being-there of the world: H. 132 

historizing of the world: H. 389 

‘natural conception of vhe world’: 
H. jasa (Section 11) 


Being and Time 


the “nothing” of the world: H. 187, 
189, 276, 335, 343 

ontology of the world: H. 100 

‘subjectivity’ of the world: H. 36 

transcendence of the world: H. 
350-366 (Section 69, esp. 69c), 


419 

worldhood of the world: (See entry 
Sor ‘worldhood’ below.) 7 

alien world: H. 172 

external world: (See entry above.) 

historical world: H. 376, 381, 388f 


` past world: H. 380 


primitive world: H. 82 
projected world: H. 394 
public world: H. 71 
tspiritual world: H. 47 a. ii 
twe-world: H, 65 
Twish-world: H. 195 
with-world: (See ntry ebave.) 
twork-world, world of work: (Se: 
entry above.) 
world of equipineni: equipment. 
world: H. 354, 359, 415 
world of plant and anuaals: H. 246 
world that has been: H., 361 
world tiar has-been-there: di. 253 
world that is no longer: H. 38c 
world-character: H. 414 
tworld-conscience: H. 278 
Tworlid-history, world-historica:: 
“Weltgeschichte, *weltgeschi- 
chtlich 
H. ı9f, 332, 377, 387-397 (Sec- 
tions 75, 76), 428 n. xvii (Hegel), 
434 (Hegel) 
tworld-point: H. 362 
tworld-space: H. 54, 104 
world-structure: H. 366, 414 
tworld-stuff: *Weltstoff 
H. 71, 85 
worid-tirae: (See entry under ‘time’ 
abaut.) 
tworld-view: *Weltanschauung, 
weltanschaulich 
H. 180, 200, 301 n. xv (Jaspers), 


392, 396 
(Note: cf. also H. 47.) à 

The world is not an entity within- 

the-world: H. 72, 118 
Dasein is its world: H. 364 
The world is ‘there’: H. 144 
The world frees entities: H. 123, 129 
How death ‘came into the world’: 


H. 248 


Index of English Expressions 


worid.—cont. 

Descartes on the world: H. 89-90; 
(I, III) 

Husserl on the world: H. 47 a. ii 

Kant on the world: H. 108, 321 

‘world’: *“Welt” 
( fin. H. 63) (af. H. 63-65, 89, 202) 

abandoning (verlassen) the ‘world’: 
H. 238 

abandonment (überlassen) to the 
‘world’: H. 356, 406, 412f 

absorption in the ‘world’: H. 184, 
18a 

addressing cnese'f to the ‘worid’ 
etc.: H. 59 

Being-aiongside the ‘world’: H. 175, 
18., 189, 311, 352 

concirniry oneself with the ‘world’: 

H. 136, 149, 175, 184f, 252, 270, 
277; 312, 398, q'il 

desevering the ‘world’: H. 105 

devotion to the ‘world’: H. 136 

discovering ihe world’: H. rio, 129, 
20%, 297, 312 

“aiding rte the “world? Ti, 175, 185, 
Bg, 358 

fascination wita the ‘world’: H. 176 

swing the world’: JL gt 

srewing the ‘world’: A. 198 

izsiing the ‘wortd’ ‘matter’ to one: 
H, 139 

einge oneeelf in the ‘world’: H. 221, 
346 

presapposing the ‘world’: H. 64 

relaticnship to the ‘world’: H. 57 

seeing the ‘world’: H. 138 

spatializing the ‘world’: H. 112 

submittedness to the ‘world’: H. 161, 
277, 383 

surrendering to ihe ‘world’: H, 139 

theoretical attitude towards the 
ward’: ot. 356 

underwanding the ‘world’: H. 148, 
201 


583 


understanding oneself in terms of the 
‘world’: H. 15, 22, 221, 411 

anxiety and the ‘world’: H. 187, 189 

fear and the ‘world’: H. 189 

Nature and the ‘world’: H. 25 

Reality and the ‘world’: H. 183, 207 

the Being-present-at-hand of the 
‘world’: H. 132, 192 

alien ‘world’: H. 356 

the ‘world’ as it looks: H. 172 

Descartes on the ‘world’: H. 99-101 
(I, IIT C) 

worldhood: *Weltlichkeit 

But cf.: deprive of its worldhood 
(*entweltlichen) 

( ftn. H. 63) (df. H. 86, 87, 88, 123) 

H. 41, 63-119 (I, III), 123, 137%, 
145, 183f, 187, 192, 200-212 
(Section 43), 334f, 414, 416, 424 

Twordless: *weltlos 
H. 55, 110f, 188, 192, 206, 211, 316, 


300, 3 
worldly: weltlich (after the manner of 
the world, H. 273, 278) 

Hit ef: worldly character (*Welt- 
rassigkeit) ; Cuis-worldly (* Dies- 
seits); other-worldly (* jenseits;. 

(jin. H. 63) (af. H. 65) 

H. 55, 119, 161, 166, 274, 276, 307, 


344 
wovldly character: *Weltmässigkeit 
Est cf.: world-character (*Weit- 
charakter, H. 4:4) 
i fin. H. 63) 
H. 72-76 (Section 16), 79f, 85, 95, 
112, 209 n, xvii 
worry: * Besorgnis 
H. 192, 197 


yesterday: gestern 
H. 371 
the “yonder”: *das Dort 
H. 102, ı07f, rraf, 139, 
4i6f 


186, 369, 


INDEX OF LATIN EXPRESSIONS 


a potiori fit denominatio : H. 329 

a priori: H. 4, 11, 41, 44f, 50 n. x, 53, 
58, 65, 85, 101, 110f, 115, 131, 
149f, 152, 165, 183, 193, 199, 206, 
229, 321, 362 

adaequatio intellectus et rei: H. 214, 216f 

(fin. H. 214) 
anima: H. 1 
animal rationale; H. 48, 165 


bonum: H. 286, 345 


capax mutationum: H. 91, 96 

circulus vitiosus: H. 152 

cogilare, cogitationes: H. 46, 49, 211, 433 
(Note: see also ‘res cogitans’ and ‘ego 

cogiio’.) 

cogito me cogitare rem: H. 433 

cogito sum: H. 24, 40, 46, 89, 211 

colo: H. 54 

color: H. 91 

commercium: H. 62, 132, 176 

communis opinio: H. 403 (Yorck) 

compositum: H. 244 n. ili 
(Note: cf. also H. 191, 198: ‘Kompo- 

sıtum’.) 

concupiscentia : H. 171 

conscientia: H. 433 

convenientia: H. 132, 214f 

contritio: H. 190 n. iv 

correspondentia: H. 214 

cura: H. 183, 197-199, 197 n. v 


definitio: H. 4 
diligio: H. 54 
durities: H. 91 


ego: H. 43, 46, 211 
ego cogito: H. 22, 89 
ens: H. 24 
ens creatum: H. 24, 92 
ens finitum: H. 49 
ens increatum: H. 24 
ens infinitum: H. 24 
ens perfectissimum: H. 92 
ens quod natum est convenire cum omni 
enti: Fi. 14 
ens realissimum: H. 128 
modus specialis entis: H. 14 


essentia: H. 42f 
existentia: H. 42f 
(fin. H. 25) 
existit, ad existendum: H. 95 
exitus: H. 241 


extensio: H. 89-91, 93-95, 97, 99-101 


factum brutum: H. 135 
fundamentum inconcussum: H. 24 
futurum: 
bonum futurum: H. 345 
malum futurum: H. 141, 341, 345 
meditatio futurae vitae: H. 249 n. vi 


habitare: H. 54 
habitus: H. 300 
homo: H. 198 

humus: H. 198 


intellectio: H. 95f 
intellectus: H. 214, 216, 225 
intuitus: H. 358 


libertas indifferentiae: H. 144 
lurnen naturale: H. 133, 170 


malum: H. 141, 286, 341, 345 
meditatio futurae vitae: H. 249 n. v. 
modus: H. 14, gof 

molus: H. gı 


nunc stans: H. 427 n. xiii 


perfectio: H. 199 
poenitentia: H. 190 n. iv 
pondus: H. g1 
praesuppositum: H. 101 
privatio: H. 286 
privativum: H. 284 
propensioin...: H. 188 
proprietas: H. 93, 100 


ralio: H. 34, 94 
(fin. H. 34) 
realiter: H. 94 
remanens capax mutationuin: H. 96 


Index of Latin Expresstons 


res: H. 67, 201, 209, 214, 216, 225 
res cogilans: H. 98, 112f, 207, 211, 
319f, 320 n. xix 
res corporea: H. 89, gof, 94, 101 
res exiensa: H. 66, 89-92 (Section 19), 
g7f, 112 


sensatio: H. 96 
sollicitudo: H. 199 n. vii 
solus ipse: H. 188 
stare 
_ (fin. H. 303) 
status corruptionis: H. 180, 306 n. iì 
status gratiae: H. 180 
status tntergritatis: H. 180 
subjectum: H. 46, 114 
(Note: cf. H. 319, 322: ‘subjektum’.) 


585 
substantia: H. 89f, 92, 94 
sum: H. 24, 211 

(Note: cf. entry for ‘cogito sum.) 


totum: H. 244 n. iii 

timor castus et servilis: H. 190 n. iv 
transcendens, transcendentia: H. 3, 14, 38 
transcendentalis: H. 38 


univoce: H. 93 


veritas: H. 38 

verum: H. 14 

via negationis et eminenliae: H, 427 n. xiii 
vitiosus: H. 152f 


INDEX OF GREEK EXPRESSIONS 


ayadov: H. 29 
ayvoetv: H. 33 
atolas: H. 14, 33, 96, 226 
axoAovßeiv: H. 432 n. xxx 
GAnGés, aAydera, aAndeveır: 
(fin. H. 33) 
H. 33, 219f, 222, 223 n. xxxix 
adv@pwros: H. 4 


ars: H. 92 


drodalyeodaı, amddavaıs: H. 32-34, 


154, 218f 
dptOpos xwicews: H. 432 n. xx 
apxý: H. 212 


yévos: H. 3 
ytyavropayia nepi rüs oðolas: H. 2 


önAovr: H. 32 
d&:aywoyyj: H. 138 
dtalpeocs: H. 159 
S:avoetv: H. 96, 226 
ööfa: H. 223 n. xxxix 


elödva: H. 171 


(fin. H. 171) 
elSos: H. 61, 319 
elvai: H. 171 


Exoraois, éxoranixdy: H. 329 


(fin. H. 329) 
émAavOdvopat: H. 219 
dppnvevcw, Epunveta: H. 37, 158 
edx4: H. 32 


{@ov Adyow &xov: H. 25, 48, 165 
Gavpdtav; H. 172 

töia: H. 33 

«aßdAov: H. 3 

xarnyopeiadaı, karnyopia: H. 44f 


xpiver Aédyw: H. 2221 


Aad- 


(fin. H. 33) 
Aavddva: H. 219 


Adyew: H. 25f, 34, 43 
(fin. H. 34) 


Aöyos: H. 25, 32-34, 37, 44, 48, 59; 
154, 158-160, 165, 219f, 222f, 225f 


(fin. H. 34, 44) 
Avan: H. 342 


peßefıs: H. 216 
pippva: H. 194 n. vii 


. py dv: H. 138 


plos: H. 6 


voeiv, vóņpa, vénas: H. 14, 25f, 33, 


43, 59, 96, 171, 214, 226 
(fin. H. 44, 171) 
viv: H. 432 n, xxx 


öAov: H. 244 n. iii 
dpoiwpa: H. 214 
(fin. H. 214) 
ôv, övra: H. 1, 3, 14, 138 
(fin. H. 1) 
épdyopas: H. 171 
(fin. H. 171) 
öpos: H. 432 n. xxx 
ovela: H. 2, 25f, go 
(fin. H. 25) 


maßnna, mados: H. 138, 214 
räv: H. 244 n. ui 
mapovoia: H. 25 

(fin. H. 25) 
mpäypa: H. 68, 214, 219 
mpäfıs: H. 68 


faoravn: H. 138 


anyu: H. 432 n. xxx 
ow-: H. 33 

otvOens: H. 33f, 159 
gawwvópws: H. 93 
o$atpa: H. 432 n. xxx 


rapax: H. 342 
rée ri: H. 432 n. Xxx 


únoreipevov: H. 34, 46, 319 


Index of Greek Expressions 587 


da-: H. 28 ¢a5: H. 28 
dalvo, daivecOa, davdpevov: H. 28f, 
32, 219 xpdvos: H. 432 n. xxx 
$davracla: H. 33 
dpdlav örws Exe: H. 219 pevdeo9a: H. 33 


darf: H. 33 boh: H. 14, 214 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Ackermann aus Böhmen, Der: H. 245 n. iv 


Aristotle: H. 2, 3, 10, 14, 18, 25, 26, 
32, 33, 39, 40, 93, 138-40, 159, 
171, 199, 208, 212-4, 219, 225, 
226, 244 n. ill, 341, 342, 399, 402, 
421, 427, 428, 432, 433 

De Anima: H. 14 and n. vi. 

De Interpretatione” H. 32 n. iv, 214 
and n. xxix 

Ethica Nicomachea: H. 32 n. iv, 225 n. 
xlii 

Metaphysica: H. 3, 32 n. iv, 39, 138 n. 
iv, 171, 212, 213, 225 n. xlii 

Physica: H. 421 n. vii, 427, 428, 
432 n. XXX 

Rhetorica : H. 138, 140 n. vi, 342 n. vi 

Augustine of Hippo, Saint: H. 43, 44, 

139, 171, 190 n. iv, 199 N. vii, 427 
Confessiones: H. 43, 44, 171, 427 
Contra Faustum: H. 139 n. v 
De diversis quaestionibus octoginta tri- 

bus; 190 n. iv 

Avicenna: H. 214 


Baer, K. von: H. 58 

Becker, O.: H. r12 n. xxii 

Bergson, Henri: H. 18. 26, 47, 333; 
432 n. XXX 

Bernt, A.: H. 245 n. iv 

Bilfinger, G.: H. 418 n. v 

Bolzano, Bernhard: H. 218 n. xxxiv 

Brentano, Franz: H. 215 

Bücheler, F.: H. 197 n. v 

Burdach, K.: H. 197 n. v, 199, 245 n, 


iv 


Cajetan, Thomas de Vio: H. 93 n. xiv 
Calvin, John: H. 49, 249 n. vi 
Cassirer, Ernst,: H. 51 n. xi 


Descartes, René: H. 22, 24, 25, 40, 
45, 46, 66, 89-101, 203, 204, 205 n. 
XV, 211, 320 n. XIX, 433 
Meditations: H. 24, 98 
Principia Philosophiae: H. go-4, 96, 


97 
Diels, H.: H. 212 n. xx, 219 n. XXV, 


418 nv 
Dilthey, Wilhelm: H. 46, 47 and n. ii, 


205 n. xv, 209, 210 and n. xix, 


249 n. vi, 377, 385 n. viii, 397-404 
Duns Scotus, Johannes: H. 3 


Earth (Tellus): H. 198 
Faust: H. 401 


Genesis: H. 48 

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von: H. 
197 N. v, 401 

Gotti, F.: H. 388 n. ix 

Grimm, Jakob: H. 54 n. i 


ee Nicolai: Į. 
433 N. XXX 
Hegel, G. W. F.: H. 2, 3, 22, 171,235 D. 
Vi, 272 n. vi, 320 n. xix, 405, 406, 
av} and n. xvi, 428-96 
Die Vernunft in der Geschichte: II. 423, 


208 n. xvi, 


42.4 
Encyktopädie: H. 429, 432 n. xxx 
Jena Logik: H. 432 n. xxx 
Phänomenologie des Geistes: H. 434 
Wissenschaft der Logik: H. 431 n. xxv, 


433 
Heidegger, Martin: H. 38 n. v, 51 n. 
xi, 72 n. i, 199 n. vii, 268 n. ili, 
310 Nn. xvi, 418 n. v 
Heimsoeth, H.: H. 320 n. x1x 
Heracleitus: H. 219 
Herbig, G.: H. 349 n. xii 
Herder, Johann Gottfried von: H. 
197 n. v, 198 n. vi 
Hermann, Karl Friedrich: H. 400 
Homer: H, 400 
Humboldt, W. von: H. 119, 166 
Husserl, Edmund: H. 38 and n. v, 47 
and n. ii, 50 n. x, 41 n. Xi, 77 n. ii, 
166 n. x, 218 n. xxxiv, 244 n. iii, 
363 n. xxiii 
Ideen: H. 47, 77 n. 
Logische Untersuchungen: H. 38, 77 Nn. 
ii, 166 n. x, 218 n. xxxiv, 244 n. 
jii, 363 n. xxiii 
‘Philosophie als 
schaft’: H. 47 
Hyginus: H. 197 n. v 


strenge Wissen- 


Index of Proper Names 


Israeli, Isaac: H. 2:4 


Jacob: H. 401 

Jaspers, Karl: H. 249 n. vi, 301 n. 
vi, 338 n. iii 

Jupiter: H. 198 


Kähler, Martin: H. 272 n. vi 
Kant, Immanuel: H. 4, 23, 24, 26, 30, 
31, 40, 51 n. Xi, 94, IOI, 109, 110, 
203-6, 208, 210, 215, 229, 271, 
272 n. vi, 293, 318 and n. xv, 
319 and n. xvi, 320 and n. xix, 
321, 358, 367,- 419, 427 and n. 
Xvi, 432 n. XXX 
Kritik der reinen Vernunft: H. 23, 30, 


31, 51 n. Xi, 94, 203-5, 318, 319, 
8 


35 
‘Was heisst: sich im Denken orien- 
tieren?’: H. 109 
Kierkegaard, Søren: H. 
235 n. vi, 338 n. ili 
Korschelt, E.: H. 246 n. v 


190 n., iv, 


Lask, E.: H. 218 n. xxxiv 
Lotze, Rudolf Hermann: H. 99, 155 
Luther, Martin: H. 16, 190 n. iv 


Misch, G.: H. 399 n. xiv 


New Testament: H. 199 n. vii, 400 

Newton, Isaac: H. 226, 227 

Nietzsche, Friedrich: H. 264, 272 n. 
vi, 396 


Parmenides: H. 14, 25, 26, 100, 171, 
212, 213, 222, 223 n. Xxxix 

Pascal, Blaise: H. 139 

Paul, Saint: H. 249 n. vi 

Petavius, Dionysius: H. 418 n, v 


589 


Plato: H. I, 2, 3, 6, 25, 32, 39, 159, 
244 n. iii, oe 402, 423 
Parmenides: H. 39 
Sophistes: H. 1, 6 
Timaeus: H. 423 


Ranke, Leopold von: H. 400 
Reinhardt, Karl: H. 223 n. xxxix 
Rickert, Heinrich: H. 375 
Ritschl, Albrecht: H. 272 n. vi 
Ruhl, F.: H. 419 n. v 


Saturn: H. 198 

Scaliger, Josephus Justus: H. 418 n. v 

Scheler, Max: H. 47, 48, 139, 208 n. 
xvi, 210 and n. xix, 272 n. vi, 
291 n. viii, 320 n. xix 

Schopenhauer, Arthur: H. 272 n. vi 

Seneca: H. 199 

Simmel, Georg: H. 249 n. vi, 375, 
418 n. v 

Spranger, Eduard: H. 394 n. xi 

Stoics: H. 199 n. viii 

Stoker, H. G.: H. 272 n. vi 

Suarez, Franciscus: H. 22 


Thomas Aquinas, Saint: H. 3, 14 and 
n. vii, 214 and n. xxx 

Thucydides: H. 39 

Tolstoy, Leo: H. 254 n. xii 


Unger, Rudolf: H. 249 n, vi 
Wackernagel, Jakob: H. 349 n. xii 
Windelband, Wilhelm: H. 399 
Wolff, Christian: H. 28 


Yorck von Wartenburg, Paul Graf: 
H. 377, 397-404 


Zwingli, Huldreich: H. 49 


