Introduction to 


Z 
x 
E z EN 
- b 
l 
AE 
| y 
= 
1 
P 
his 
| 


MARTIN HEIDEGGER Was born in 1889 at Messkirch in Baden, 
Germany. He attended the university at nearby Freiburg and 
there met Edmund Husserl whose phenomenology was to have 
a marked influence on Heideggers thought. In 1915 he be- 
came Privatdocent at the University of Freiburg, and in 1923 
professor of philosophy at Marburg. While at Marburg, Hei- 
degger published Sein und Zeit (1927) (Being and Time) 
which, though not completed, nevertheless stands as his mas- 
terwork. In 1929 Heidegger succeeded Husserl to the Chair 
of Philosophy at Freiburg, and four years later, when the Na- 
tional Socialists were in power, he was appointed Rector of 
the university, a post which he resigned in 1935. Ten years 
after this, following Germany's surrender in the Second World 
War, Heidegger was dismissed from his Chair of Philosophy 
because of alleged Nazi sympathies. He thereupon retired to 
a life of seclusion near Freiburg. AN INTRODUCTION TO META- 
pHysics made its first printed appearance, in German (Ein- 
führung in die Metaphysik), in 1953, although the essential 
material had been presented eighteen years before in one of 
his university lectures. 


AN INTRODUCTION 
TO METAPHYSICS 


Martin Heidegger 


Translated by Ralph Manheim 


Anchor Books 
Doubleday & Company, Inc. 
Garden City, New York 


COVER DESIGN BY SIDNEY BUTCHKES 


An Introduction to Metaphysics was originally published in German 
by Max Niemeyer Verlag in 1953. This translation was published by 
Yale University Press, Inc. in 1959. The Anchor Books edition is 
published by arrangement with Yale University Press, Inc. 


Anchor Books edition: 1961 


Copyright © 1959 by Yale University Press, Inc. 
All Rights Reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 


CONTENTS 


TRANSLATOR’S NOTE 
PREFATORY NOTE 
1. THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION OF METAPHYSICS 


2. ON THE GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF THE WORD 
“BEING” 
1. The Grammar of the Word “Being” (Sein) 
2. The Etymology of the Word “Being” 


3. THE QUESTION OF THE ESSENCE OF BEING 


4. Tae LIMITATION or BEING 
1. Being and Becoming 
2. Being and Appearance 
3. Being and Thinking 
4. Being and the Ought 


INDEX 


E 


TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 


For Heidegger the whole history of human thought and 
existence has been dominated and characterized by man's 
understanding of being; the disorientation of modern thought 
and existence is rooted in "forgetfulness of being." In an In- 
troduction to Metaphysics he accordingly investigates the 
meaning of being and the history of man's understanding of 
being. 

He finds this history and this meaning recorded in philoso- 
phy, poetry, and above all in the language that underlies 
them both. *. . . words and language," he writes, (p. 11) 
“are not wrappings. . . for. . . those who write and speak. 
It is in words and language that things first come into being 
and are." And further on: (p. 42) ^. . . the destroyed rela- 
tion to being as such is the actual reason for the general mis- 
relation to language." This explains why so much of the pres- 
ent book is taken up with the origin and vicissitudes of words. 
It also accounts in large part for Heidegger's style and the 
difficulty of translating him. Attaching the importance he does 
to words, he uses them very carefully, taking account of their 
"weights" and overtones. These of course vary from language 
to language. 

Every writer of any character is deeply involved in his own 
language. But this is true of Heidegger in a special sense, 
*For along with German the Greek language is (in regard to 
its possibilities for thought) at once the most powerful and 
most spiritual of all languages" (p. 47). And it is perfectly 


X TRANSLATORS NOTE 


true that no other language has been moulded to the same 
degree as German by idealistic philosophy. A translator some- 
times asks himself: How would the author have said this in 
my language? Here too this method has its application, for 
luckily English and German have a good deal in common. 
But it also has its limits, because if Heidegger had been at 
home in English—this less "spiritual" language—he would have 
written (and thought) differently. It does little good to ask 
how he would have said “in-sich-aus-sich-hinausstehen” in my 
language. And the same problem arises when a German word 
(such as “Not,” p. 136 f., or “Fug,” p. 134) has overtones that 
cannot be suggested by any English word. In such cases it 
often seems necessary to choose between fluency and meaning. 
My choice has always been to attempt, by every means I could 
find, to convey the meaning. Heidegger himself makes this 
choice. He is a very eloquent writer but he does not hesitate 
to write in harsh, broken periods when his meaning demands 
it. He is often strange in German and he will often be strange 
in English, though not always in the same places. 

This is a book about "Sein" in its relation to “Seiendes” and 
"Dasein." The English word "being" is an almost satisfactory 
equivalent for “Sein.” I say “almost,” because “Sein” is an in- 
finitive while “being” is of participial origin, and this creates 
complications in connection with Heidegger’s grammatical 
analyses. As to “seiend,” it is a philosophical invention, a word 
“alien to everyday speech” (p. 64). From the standpoint both 
of style and of meaning it has seemed to me essential to render 
“seiend” by the same word throughout, a word that is part of 
the verb “to be” and “alien to everyday speech.” But there is 
no such word in English. “Existent” has often been used. There 
are two objections: 1) it does not derive from the verb “to be”; 
2) it means something else in Heidegger. Another solution has 
been to render “Das Seiende” as “What is” and “ein Seiendes” 
and “die Seienden” respectively as “a being” and “beings.” 
Though I have used “what is” in one or two places where it 
seemed eminently to fit, I have in the main discarded these 
solutions. For one thing, the constant use of two different 
words for this key term seems to obscure Heidegger’s thought. 
For another, I should have been driven to such turns of phrase 
as “the being that belongs to every being,” “the troublesome 


TRANSLATOR'S NOTE xi 


circumstance that being is not a being,” “a copy as it were 
of the experienced being." In the last it is not even immediately 
clear which kind of being is meant. 

I have therefore taken the liberty to coin a word: “essent,” 
"essents," "the essent," based on the fiction that essens, essentis 
is the present participle of sum. I hope the bad Latin is not 
too strong an objection to my word. 

"Dasein" raises a different kind of problem. It is an every- 
day German word meaning "existence." But Heidegger breaks 
it down into its components, “being” and “there,” and gives 
it a very particular meaning (see note p. 8). I have rendered 
it throughout as “being-there,” because not only Heidegger's 
“Da-sein” but his “Dasein” as well has a special definition and 
dignity that are lacking in the colorless “existence.” 

A word must be said about Heidegger's translations from 
the Greek, which differ radically from other translations of 
the same texts. Heidegger's translations are based on his in- 
vestigations of Greek words and Greek thought. Since his in- 
terpretations of words and thought are very different from the 
traditional ones, it is only natural that his translations should 
be different from traditional translations. What I have ren- 
dered is Heidegger's versions and not the Greek originals. 

As Heidegger explains in his Preface, he himself has used 
parentheses and square brackets in the text. These remain un- 
changed in the translation. For the insertions I myself have 
been obliged to make I have used angle brackets: (. . .). 
These usually enclose German words when I was unable to 
carry a play on words or roots into the translation. Sometimes 
they contain brief explanatory remarks. 

I am indebted for help and advice to Norbert Guterman, 
Joseph Frank, John Wild of Harvard University, Charles Hen- 
del of Yale University, and Jean Wahl of the Sorbonne whose 
commentary on the present work, Vers la fin de l'ontologie, 
Paris, 1956, I consulted freely. 


z » 2m + a 


S * 
- 5 - 22 è 
Pts! hiria aan ott er ktea 
L x^ KOEF “we 
iy: § ote cod) Docks. 2 os dated ^ 
2 r4 a hd d mo o oet ip 


=a x "ed beso eimi 


MED E Ars geri «cro Asie guy 
ionin ES Sa IL M rur TIN 
- Ld 


i PSN uem ee wml A mda "EY 


eee é f papm " p " M" 
s - cx t9 "me è Qo 
LJ = 
o cm i fa s oor 
" De 7 mz M i 2 uw a 
» - - E 
Face == - 1 x » Qc 


Es Ó J ^4 3 e. E ^ 72 JA 
- & - , » k 124 A ha Fey 
"uer. rudi Lx ‘ - 
Z3 B TYE-AIMCLÉGsSTL2OUw m 
y II * 1 
E um P. us IE pi M. a A 
— S0 
Reef) = oil uke m - 
Amat . = a$ er? n.a 
An S — ' j 
t an 2 j Cus ^4t 
53 a i ESEN i 4 ! az "n 
+e e n , EE 
im -—— E pM -A wed 
i x 53 +s in orea 


m Hd " 


indie 23> v» aae to ii coo 
- " " » 
a WE arp eee 


-— 
1-2 - 4 bit ANg} 

P 

we. imo. ULIS 

> Hi 

" E mn 6 


sa s RS EL 
> 2 | 
M i 
à 
E ò) J 4 ng 


Prefatory Note to the German Edition of 1973 


The present volume contains the fully reworked text of 
the lecture bearing the same title that I delivered at the Uni- 
versity of Freiburg in Breisgau in the summer semester of 
1935. 

There is a difference between the spoken and the written 
word. 

I have made no change in the content, but as a help to the 
reader I have broken up long sentences, introduced connec- 
tives, deleted repetitions, remedied oversights, and rectified 
imprecisions. 

Matter in parentheses was written while I was reworking 
the text. The square brackets contain remarks added in the 
ensuing years. 

In order to understand fully in what sense and for what 
reason the term “metaphysics” is included in the title, the 
reader must first have participated in the development of the 
lecture. 


d 


00 -—— i 
= - —7— 5 2 


Poen bb agnibu semi adr id ee MD 
È i P 
l 


d ce 


" 
—— 
uM 


5 


ders etiem vila «d inh “KUN? hican wee 
Veer Exsdvz wo | imd] tdi noes 245 good pile 
es Sane a tt Cad n gut So ae 


ame gil Tan. “sagt UE aste arnelh o Edw 


d Safad e er bid aes suf i auus oo aber si y 
EL ETE Dogri- er Aseo tt Spl my sknd emt i 7 
lies Ge sinew bilann zener tatalab. D 
Buil yon. aa: Ibi an pow — n Bi P L] 
cal ib Sonis ER mapa speaks gore sul T 


AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


I. 


THE FUNDAMENTAL 
QUESTION 
OF METAPHYSICS 


Why are there essents? rather than nothing? That is the 
question. Clearly it is no ordinary question. ^Why are there 
essents, why is there anything at all, rather than nothing?"— 
obviously this is the first of all questions, though not in a 
chronological sense. Individuals and peoples ask a good many 
questions in the course of their historical passage through 
time. They examine, explore, and test a good many things 
before they run into the question ^Why are there essents 
rather than nothing?" Many men never encounter this ques- 
tion, if by encounter we mean not merely to hear and read 
about it as an interrogative formulation but to ask the ques- 
tion, that is, to bring it about, to raise it, to feel its inevitability. 

And yet each of us is grazed at least once, perhaps more 
than once, by the hidden power of this question, even if he 
is not aware of what is happening to him. The question looms 
in moments of great despair, when things tend to lose all their 
weight and all meaning becomes obscured. Perhaps it will 
strike but once like a muflled bell that rings into our life and 
gradually dies away. It is present in moments of rejoicing, 
when all the things around us are transfigured and seem to 
be there for the first time, as if it might be easier to think they 
are not than to understand that they are and are as they are. 
The question is upon us in boredom, when we are equally re- 
moved from despair and joy, and everything about us seems 


* "Essents" — "existents," "things that art." See Translator's Note, 
p. xi. 


2 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


so hopelessly commonplace that we no longer care whether 
anything is or is not-and with this the question "Why are 
there essents rather than nothing?" is evoked in a particular 
form. 

But this question may be asked expressly, or, unrecog- 
nized as a question, it may merely pass through our lives 
like a brief gust of wind; it may press hard upon us, or, under 
one pretext or another, we may thrust it away from us and 
silence it. In any case it is never the question that we ask first 
in point of time. 

But it is the first question in another sense—in regard to 
rank. This may be clarified in three ways. The question ^Why 
are there essents rather than nothing?" is first in rank for us 
first because it is the most far reaching, second because it is 
the deepest, and finally because it is the most fundamental 
of all questions. 

It is the widest of all questions. It confines itself to no par- 
ticular essent of whatever kind. The question takes in every- 
thing, and this means not only everything that is present in 
the broadest sense but also everything that ever was or will 
be. The range of this question finds its limit only in nothing, 
in that which simply is not and never was. Everything that 
is not nothing is covered by this question, and ultimately even 
nothing itself; not because it is something, since after all we 
speak of it, but because it is nothing. Our question reaches out 
so far that we can never go further. We do not inquire into 
this and that, or into each essent in turn, but from the very 
outset into the essent as a whole, or, as we say for reasons to 
be discussed below: into the essent as such in its entirety. 

This broadest of questions is also the deepest: Why are 
there essents . . . ? Why, that is to say, on what ground? from 
what source does the essent derive? on what ground does it 
stand? The question is not concerned with particulars, with 
what essents are and of what nature at any time, here and 
there, with how they can be changed, what they can be used 
for, and so on. The question aims at the ground of what is 
insofar as it is. To seek the ground is to try to get to the bot- 
tom; what is put in question is thus related to the ground. 
However, since the question is a question, it remains to be 
seen whether the ground arrived at is really a ground, that 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 8 


is, whether it provides a foundation; whether it is a primal 
ground ( Ur-grund ); or whether it fails to provide a founda- 
tion and is an abyss ( Ab-grund ); or whether the ground is 
neither one nor the other but presents only a perhaps neces- 
sary appearance of foundation—in other words, it is a non- 
ground ( Un-grund ). Be that as it may, the ground in question 
must account for the being of the essent as such. This ques- 
tion ^why" does not look for causes that are of the same kind 
and on the same level as the essent itself. This ^why" does not 
move on any one plane but penetrates to the "underlying" 
( ^zu-grunde" liegend ) realms and indeed to the very last of 
them, to the limit; turning away from the surface, from all 
shallowness, it strives toward the depths; this broadest of all 
questions is also the deepest. 

Finally, this broadest and deepest question is also the most 
fundamental. What do we mean by this? If we take the ques- 
tion in its full scope, namely the essent as such in its entirety, 
it readily follows that in asking this question we keep our dis- 
tance from every particular and individual essent, from every 
this and that. For we mean the essent as a whole, without 
any special preference. Still, it is noteworthy that in this ques- 
tioning one kind of essent persists in coming to the fore, 
namely the men who ask the question. But the question 
should not concern itself with any particular essent. In the 
spirit of its unrestricted scope, all essents are of equal value. 
An elephant in an Indian jungle "is" just as much as some 
chemical combustion process at work on the planet Mars, 
and so on. 

Accordingly, if our question ^Why are there essents rather 
than nothing?" is taken in its fullest sense, we must avoid 
singling out any special, particular essent, including man. For 
what indeed is man? Consider the earth within the endless 
darkness of space in the universe. By way of comparison it 
is a tiny grain of sand; between it and the next grain of its 
own size there extends a mile or more of emptiness; on the sur- 
face of this grain of sand there lives a crawling, bewildered 
swarm of supposedly intelligent animals, who for a moment 
have discovered knowledge." And what is the temporal exten- 


* Cf. Nietzsche, Über Wahrheit und Lüge im aussermoralischen 
Sinne. 1873 Nachlass. 


4 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


sion of a human life amid all the millions of years? Scarcely a 
move of the second hand, a breath. Within the essent as a 
whole there is no legitimate ground for singling out this es- 
sent which is called mankind and to which we ourselves hap- 
pen to belong. 

But whenever the essent as a whole enters into this ques- 
tion, a privileged, unique relation arises between it and the 
act of questioning. For through this questioning the essent as 
a whole is for the first time opened up as such with a view to 
its possible ground, and in the act of questioning it is kept 
open. In relation to the essent as such in its entirety the ask- 
ing of the question is not just any occurrence within the realm 
of the essent, like the falling of raindrops for example. The 
question ^why" may be said to confront the essent as a whole, 
to break out of it, though never completely. But that is ex- 
actly why the act of questioning is privileged. Because it con- 
fronts the essent as a whole, but does not break loose from 
it, the content of the question reacts upon the questioning 
itself. Why the why? What is the ground of this question 
“why” which presumes to ask after the ground of the essent 
as a whole? Is the ground asked for in this why not merely a 
foreground—which would imply that the sought-for ground 
is again an essent? Does not the "first" question nevertheless 
come first in view of the intrinsic rank of the question of being 
and its modulations? 

To be sure, the things in the world, the essents, are in no 
way affected by our asking of the question ^Why are there 
essents rather than nothing?" Whether we ask it or not, the 
planets move in their orbits, the sap of life flows through plant 
and animal. 

But if this question is asked and if the act of questioning 
is really carried out, the content and the object of the question 
react inevitably on the act of questioning. Accordingly this 
questioning is not just any occurrence but a privileged hap- 
pening that we call an event. 

This question and all the questions immediately rooted in 
it, the questions in which this one question unfolds—this ques- 
tion ^why" is incommensurable with any other. It encounters 
the search for its own why. At first sight the question “Why 
the why?" looks like a frivolous repetition ad infinitum of the 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 5 


same interrogative formulation, like an empty and unwar- 
ranted brooding over words. Yes, beyond a doubt, that is 
how it looks. The question is only whether we wish to be taken 
in by this superficial look and so regard the whole matter as 
settled, or whether we are capable of finding a significant event 
in this recoil of the question ^why" upon itself. 

But if we decline to be taken in by surface appearances we 
shall see that this question ^why," this question as to the 
essent as such in its entirety, goes beyond any mere playing 
with words, provided we possess sufficient intellectual en- 
ergy to make the question actually recoil into its ^why"—for 
it will not do so of its own accord. In so doing we find out 
that this privileged question ^why" has its ground in a leap 
through which man thrusts away all the previous security, 
whether real or imagined, of his life. The question is asked 
only in this leap; it is the leap; without it there is no asking. 
What "leap" means here will be elucidated later. Our ques- 
tioning is not yet the leap; for this it must undergo a transfor- 
mation; it still stands perplexed in the face of the essent. Here 
it may suffice to say that the leap in this questioning opens 
up its own source—with this leap the question arrives at its 
own ground. We call such a leap, which opens up its own 
source, the original source or origin ( Ur-sprung ), the finding 
of one's own ground. It is because the question “Why are 
there essents rather than nothing?" breaks open the ground 
for all authentic questions and is thus at the origin ( Ursprung ) 
of them all that we must recognize it as the most fundamental 
of all questions. 

It is the most fundamental of questions because it is the 
broadest and deepest, and conversely. 

In this threefold sense the question is the first in rank— 
first, that is, in the order of questioning within the domain 
which this first question opens, defining its scope and thus 
founding it. Our question is the question of all authentic ques- 
tions, i.e. of all self-questioning questions, and whether con- 
sciously or not it is necessarily implicit in every question. No 
questioning and accordingly no single scientific “problem” can 
be fully intelligible if it does not include, i.e. ask, the question 
of all questions. Let us be clear about this from the start: it 
can never be objectively determined whether anyone, whether 


6 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


we, really ask this question, that is whether we make the leap, 
or never get beyond a verbal formula. In a historical setting 
that does not recognize questioning as a fundamental human 
force, the question immediately loses its rank. 

Anyone for whom the Bible is divine revelation and truth 
has the answer to the question ^Why are there essents rather 
than nothing?" even before it is asked: everything that is, ex- 
cept God himself, has been created by Him. God himself, the 
increate creator, "is." One who holds to such faith can in a 
way participate in the asking of our question, but he cannot 
really question without ceasing to be a believer and taking 
all the consequences of such a step. He will only be able to 
act “as if" . . . On the other hand a faith that does not per- 
petually expose itself to the possibility of unfaith is no faith 
but merely a convenience: the believer simply makes up his 
mind to adhere to the traditional doctrine. This is neither faith 
nor questioning, but the indifference of those who can busy 
themselves with everything, sometimes even displaying a keen 
interest in faith as well as questioning. 

What we have said about security in faith as one position 
in regard to the truth does not imply that the biblical “In the 
beginning God created heaven and earth" is an answer to our 
question. Quite aside from whether these words from the Bible 
are true or false for faith, they can supply no answer to our 
question because they are in no way related to it. Indeed, they 
cannot even be brought into relation with our question. From 
the standpoint of faith our question is “foolishness.” 

Philosophy is this very foolishness. A "Christian philosophy" 
is a round square and a misunderstanding. There is, to be sure, 
a thinking and questioning elaboration of the world of Chris- 
tian experience, i.e. of faith. That is theology. Only epochs 
which no longer fully believe in the true greatness of the task 
of theology arrive at the disastrous notion that philosophy can 
help to provide a refurbished theology if not a substitute for 
theology, which will satisfy the needs and tastes of the time. 
For the original Christian faith philosophy is foolishness. To 
philosophize is to ask "Why are there essents rather than 
nothing?” Really to ask the question signifies: a daring at- 
tempt to fathom this unfathomable question by disclosing 
what it summons us to ask, to push our questioning to the 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION z 


very end. Where such an attempt occurs there is philosophy. 

It would not serve our purpose to begin our discussion with 
a detailed report on philosophy. But there are a few things 
that all must know who wish to concern themselves with phi- 
losophy. They can be briefly stated. 

All essential philosophical questioning is necessarily un- 
timely. This is so because philosophy is always projected far 
in advance of its time, or because it connects the present with 
its antecedent, with what initially was. Philosophy always re- 
mains a knowledge which not only cannot be adjusted to a 
given epoch but on the contrary imposes its measure upon its 
epoch. 

Philosophy is essentially untimely because it is one of those 
few things that can never find an immediate echo in the pres- 
ent. When such an echo seems to occur, when a philosophy 
becomes fashionable, either it is no real philosophy or it has 
been misinterpreted and misused for ephemeral and extraneous 
purposes. 

Accordingly, philosophy cannot be directly learned like 
manual and technical skills; it cannot be directly applied, or 
judged by its usefulness in the manner of economic or other 
professional knowledge. 

But what is useless can still be a force, perhaps the only 
real force. What has no immediate echo in everyday life can 
be intimately bound up with a nation's profound historical 
development, and can even anticipate it. What is untimely 
will have its own times. This is true of philosophy. Conse- 
quently there is no way of determining once and for all what 
the task of philosophy is, and accordingly what must be ex- 
pected of it. Every stage and every beginning of its develop- 
ment bears within it its own law. All that can be said is what 
philosophy cannot be and cannot accomplish. 

A question has been stated: “Why are there essents rather 
than nothing?” We have claimed first place for this question 
and explained in what sense it is regarded as first. 

We have not even begun to ask the question itself, but have 
digressed into a discussion about it. Such a digression is indis- 
pensable. For this question has nothing in common with our 
habitual concerns. There is no way of familiarizing ourselves 
with this question by a gradual transition from the things to 


8 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


which we are accustomed. Hence it must, as it were, be sin- 
gled out in advance, presented. Yet in introducing the ques- 
tion and speaking of it, we must not postpone, let alone forget, 
the questioning itself. 

Here then let us conclude our preliminary remarks. 


Every essential form of spiritual life is marked by ambiguity. 
The less commensurate it is with other forms, the more it is 
misinterpreted. 

Philosophy is one of the few autonomous creative possi- 
bilities and at times necessities of man's historical being- 
there." The current misinterpretations of philosophy, all of 
which have some truth about them, are legion. Here we shall 
mention only two, which are important because of the light 
they throw on the present and future situation of philosophy. 
The first misinterpretation asks too much of philosophy. The 
second distorts its function. 

Roughly speaking, philosophy always aims at the first and 
last grounds of the essent, with particular emphasis on man 
himself and on the meaning and goals of human being-there. 
This might suggest that philosophy can and must provide a 
foundation on which a nation will build its historical life and 
culture. But this is beyond the power of philosophy. As a rule 
such excessive demands take the form of a belittling of phi- 
losophy. It is said, for example: Because metaphysics did noth- 
ing to pave the way for the revolution it should be rejected. 
This is no cleverer than saying that because the carpenter's 
bench is useless for flying it should be abolished. Philosophy 
can never directly supply the energies and create the oppor- 
tunities and methods that bring about a historical change; for 
one thing, because philosophy is always the concern of the 
few. Which few? The creators, those who initiate profound 


* The word “Dasein” is ordinarily translated as “existence.” It 
is used in “normal,” popular discourse. But Heidegger breaks it 
into its components “Da” “there” and “Sein” “being,” and puts his 
own definition on it. In general he means man’s conscious, historical 
existence in the world, which is always projected into a there be- 
yond its here. The German word Dasein has often been carried 
over into translations; the English strikes me as preferable. For 
further remarks on “being-there” see the bracketed passage on 
pp. 23-4. R.M. 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 9 


transformations. It spreads only indirectly, by devious paths 
that can never be laid out in advance, until at last, at some 
future date, it sinks to the level of a commonplace; but by then 
it has long been forgotten as original philosophy. 

What philosophy essentially can and must be is this: a 
thinking that breaks the paths and opens the perspectives of 
the knowledge that sets the norms and hierarchies, of the 
knowledge in which and by which a people fulfills itself his- 
torically and culturally, the knowledge that kindles and neces- 
sitates all inquiries and thereby threatens all values. 

The second misinterpretation involves a distortion of the 
function of philosophy. Even if philosophy can provide no 
foundation for a culture, the argument goes, it is nevertheless 
a cultural force, whether because it gives us an over-all, sys- 
tematic view of what is, supplying a useful chart by which 
we may find our way amid the various possible things and 
realms of things, or because it relieves the sciences of their 
work by reflecting on their premises, basic concepts, and prin- 
ciples. Philosophy is expected to promote and even to accel- 
erate—to make easier as it were—the practical and technical 
business of culture. 

But—it is in the very nature of philosophy never to make 
things easier but only more difficult. And this not merely be- 
cause its language strikes the everyday understanding as 
strange if not insane. Rather, it is the authentic function of 
philosophy to challenge historical being-there and hence, in 
the last analysis, being pure and simple. It restores to things, 
to the essents, their weight (being). How so? Because the 
challenge is one of the essential prerequisites for the birth 
of all greatness, and in speaking of greatness we are referring 
primarily to the works and destinies of nations. We can speak 
of historical destiny only where an authentic knowledge of 
things dominates man's being-there. And it is philosophy that 
opens up the paths and perspectives of such knowledge. 

The misinterpretations with which philosophy is perpet- 
ually beset are promoted most of all by people of our kind, 
that is, by professors of philosophy. It is our customary busi- 
ness—which may be said to be justified and even useful—to 
transmit a certain knowledge of the philosophy of the past, 
as part of a general education. Many people suppose that this 


10 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


is philosophy itself, whereas at best it is the technique of 
philosophy. 

In correcting these two misinterpretations I cannot hope to 
give you at one stroke a clear conception of philosophy. But I 
do hope that you will be on your guard when the most cur- 
rent judgments and even supposed observations assail you un- 
awares. Such judgments are often disarming, precisely because 
they seem so natural You hear remarks such as "Philosophy 
leads to nothing,” “You can't do anything with philosophy," 
and readily imagine that they confirm an experience of your 
own. There is no denying the soundness of these two phrases, 
particularly common among scientists and teachers of science. 
Any attempt to refute them by proving that after all it does 
“lead to something” merely strengthens the prevailing misin- 
terpretation to the effect that the everyday standards by 
which we judge bicycles or sulphur baths are applicable to 
philosophy. 

It is absolutely correct and proper to say that "You can't 
do anything with philosophy." It is only wrong to suppose 
that this is the last word on philosophy. For the rejoinder im- 
poses itself: granted that we cannot do anything with philoso- 
phy, might not philosophy, if we concern ourselves with it, 
do something with us? So much for what philosophy is not. 

At the outset we stated a question: “Why are there essents 
rather than nothing?" We have maintained that to ask this 
question is to philosophize. When in our thinking we open 
our minds to this question, we first of all cease to dwell in 
any of the familiar realms. We set aside everything that is 
on the order of the day. Our question goes beyond the fa- 
miliar and the things that have their place in everyday life. 
Nietzsche once said (Werke, 7, 269): “A philosopher is a 
man who never ceases to experience, see, hear, suspect, hope, 
and dream extraordinary things . . ." 

To philosophize is to inquire into the extra-ordinary. But 
because, as we have just suggested, this questioning recoils 
upon itself, not only what is asked after is extraordinary but 
also the asking itself. In other words: this questioning does 
not lie along the way so that we bump into it one day unex- 
pectedly. Nor is it part of everyday life: there is no require- 
ment or regulation that forces us into it; it gratifies no urgent 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 11 


or prevailing need. The questioning itself is “out of order." 
It is entirely voluntary, based wholly and uniquely on the 
mystery of freedom, on what we have called the leap. The 
same Nietzsche said: "Philosophy . . . is a voluntary living 
amid ice and mountain heights" (Werke, 15, 2). To philoso- 
phize, we may now say, is an extra-ordinary inquiry into the 
extra-ordinary. 

In the age of the earliest and crucial unfolding of Western 
philosophy among the Greeks, who first raised the authentic 
question of the essent as such in its entirety, the essent was 
called physis. This basic Greek word for the essent is cus- 
tomarily translated as "nature." This derives from the Latin 
translation, natura, which properly means “to be born,” “birth.” 
But with this Latin translation the original meaning of the 
Greek word physis is thrust aside, the actual philosophical 
force of the Greek word is destroyed. This is true not only of 
the Latin translation of thís word but of all other Roman trans- 
lations of the Greek philosophical language. What happened 
in this translation from the Greek into the Latin is not acci- 
dental and harmless; it marks the first stage in the process 
by which we cut ourselves off and alienated ourselves from 
the original essence of Greek philosophy. The Roman transla- 
tion was later taken over by Christianity and the Christian 
Middle Ages. And the Christian Middle Ages were prolonged 
in modern philosophy, which, moving in the conceptual world 
of the Middle Ages, coined those representations and terms 
by means of which we still try to understand the beginnings of 
Western philosophy. These beginnings are regarded as some- 
thing that present-day philosophers have supposedly tran- 
scended and long since left behind them. 

But now let us skip over this whole process of deformation 
and decay and attempt to regain the unimpaired strength of 
language and words; for words and language are not wrap- 
pings in which things are packed for the commerce of those 
who write and speak. It is in words and language that things 
first come into being and are. For this reason the misuse of 
language in idle talk, in slogans and phrases, destroys our 
authentic relation to things. What does the word physis de- 
note? It denotes self-blossoming emergence (e.g. the blossom- 
ing of a rose), opening up, unfolding, that which manifests 


12 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


itself in such unfolding and perseveres and endures in it; in 
short, the realm of things that emerge and linger on. Accord- 
ing to the dictionary phyein means to grow or make to grow. 
But what does growing mean? Does it imply only to increase 
quantitatively, to become more and larger? 

Physis as emergence can be observed everywhere, e.g. in 
celestial phenomena (the rising of the sun), in the rolling of 
the sea, in the growth of plants, in the coming forth of man 
and animal from the womb. But physis, the realm of that which 
arises, is not synonymous with these phenomena, which today 
we regard as part of "nature." This opening up and inward- 
jutting-beyond-itself ( in-sich-aus-sich-hinausstehen ) must not 
be taken as a process among other processes that we observe 
in the realm of the essent. Physis is being itself, by virtue of 
which essents become and remain observable. 

The Greeks did not learn what physis is through natural 
phenomena, but the other way around: it was through a fun- 
damental poetic and intellectual experience of being that they 
discovered what they had to call physis. It was this discovery 
that enabled them to gain a glimpse into nature in the re- 
stricted sense. Hence physis originally encompassed heaven as 
well as earth, the stone as well as the plant, the animal as well 
as man, and it encompassed human history as a work of men 
and the gods; and ultimately and first of all, it meant the gods 
themselves as subordinated to destiny. Physis means the 
power that emerges and the enduring realm under its sway. 
This power of emerging and enduring includes "becoming" 
as well as “being” in the restricted sense of inert duration. 
Physis is the process of a-rising, of emerging from the hidden, 
whereby the hidden is first made to stand. 

But if, as is usually done, physis is taken not in the original 
sense of the power to emerge and endure, but in the later and 
present signification of nature; and if moreover the motion of 
material things, of the atoms and electrons, of what modern 
physics investigates as physis, is taken to be the fundamental 
manifestation of nature, then the first philosophy of the Greeks 
becomes a nature philosophy, in which all things are held to 
be of a material nature. In this case the beginning of Greek 
philosophy, as is perfectly proper for a beginning according 
to the common-sense view, gives the impression of what we, 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 13 


once again in Latin, designate as primitive. Thus the Greeks 
become essentially a higher type of Hottentot, whom modern 
science has left far behind. Disregarding the lesser absurdities 
involved in this view of the beginning of Western philosophy 
as something primitive, we need only say this: those who put 
forward such an interpretation forget that what is under dis- 
cussion is philosophy, one of man's few great achievements. 
But what is great can only begin great. Its beginning is in 
fact the greatest thing of all. A small beginning belongs 
only to the small, whose dubious greatness it is to diminish 
all things; small are the beginnings of decay, though it may 
later become great in the sense of the enormity of total 
annihilation. 

The great begins great, maintains itself only through the 
free recurrence of greatness within it, and if it is great ends 
also in greatness. So it is with the philosophy of the Greeks. 
It ended in greatness with Aristotle. Only prosaic common 
sense and the little man imagine that the great must endure 
forever, and equate this duration with eternity. 

The Greeks called the essent as a whole physis. But it 
should be said in passing that even within Greek philosophy 
a narrowing of the word set in forthwith, although the original 
meaning did not vanish from the experience, knowledge, and 
orientation of Greek philosophy. Knowledge of its original 
meaning still lives on in Aristotle, when he speaks of the 
grounds of the essent as such (see Metaphysics, I, 1003 a 27). 

But this narrowing of physis in the direction of “physics” 
did not occur in the way that we imagine today. We oppose 
the psychic, the animated, the living, to the “physical.” But 
for the Greeks all this belonged to physis and continued to do 
so even after Aristotle. They contrasted it with what they called 
thesis, thesis, ordinance, or nomos, law, rule in the sense of 
ethos. This, however, denotes not mere norms but mores, 
based on freely accepted obligations and traditions; it is that 
which concerns free behavior and attitudes, the shaping of 
man’s historical being, the ethos which under the influence 
of morality was later degraded to the ethical. 

The meaning of physis is further restricted by contrast with 
techné—which denotes neither art nor technology but a knowl- 
edge, the ability to plan and organize freely, to master institu- 


14 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


tions (cf. Plato's Phaedrus). Techné is creating, building in 
the sense of a deliberate pro-ducing. (It would require a spe- 
cial study to explain what is essentially the same in physis and 
techné.) The physical was opposed to the historical, a do- 
main which for the Greeks was part of the originally broader 
concept of physis. But this has nothing whatever to do with 
a naturalistic interpretation of history. The realm of being as 
such and as a whole is physis—i.e. its essence and character 
are defined as that which emerges and endures. It is experi- 
enced primarily through what in a way imposes itself most 
immediately on our attention, and this was the later, narrower 
sense of physis: ta physei onta, ta physika, nature. If the ques- 
tion concerning physis in general was asked at all, i.e. if it was 
asked: What is the realm of being as such? it was primarily 
ta physei onta that gave the point of departure. Yet from the 
very outset the question could not dwell in this or that realm 
of nature, inanimate bodies, plants, animals, but had to reach 
out beyond ta physika. 

In Greek, “beyond something" is expressed by the word 
meta. Philosophical inquiry into the realm of being as such 
is meta ta physika; this inquiry goes beyond the essent, it is 
metaphysics. Here it is not important to follow the genesis 
and history of this term in detail. 

Accordingly, the question to which we have given first 
rank, “Why are there essents rather than nothing?" is the 
fundamental question of metaphysics. Metaphysics is a name 
for the pivotal point and core of all philosophy. 

[In this introduction our treatment of the entire subject has 
been intentionally superficial and hence essentially vague. 
According to our explanation of the word physis, it signifies 
the being of the essent. If the questioning is peri physeos, if 
it concerns the being of the essent, then the discussion has gone 
beyond physis, beyond "physics" in the ancient sense, and 
essentially beyond ta physika, beyond essents, and deals with 
being. From the very first “physics” has determined the es- 
sence and history of metaphysics. Even in the doctrines of 
being as pure act (Thomas Aquinas), as absolute concept 
(Hegel), as eternal recurrence of the identical will to power 
(Nietzsche), metaphysics has remained unalterably "physics." 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 15 


But the inquiry into being as such is of a different nature 
and origin. 

Within the purview of metaphysics and thinking on its 
level, we can, to be sure, consider the question about being 
as such as merely a mechanical repetition of the question 
about the essent as such. In this case the question about being 
as such is just another transcendental question, though one of 
a higher order. But this reinterpretation of the question about 
being as such bars the road to its appropriate unfolding. 

However, this new interpretation comes readily to mind; it 
is bound to suggest itself, particularly as we have spoken in 
Sein und Zeit of a “transcendental horizon.” But the “transcen- 
dental” there intended is not that of the subjective conscious- 
ness; rather, it defines itself in terms of the existential-ecstatic 
temporality of human being-there. Yet the reinterpretation of 
the question of being as such tends to take the same form as 
the question of the essent as such, chiefly because the essential 
origin of the question of the existent as such and with it the 
essence of metaphysics remain obscure. And this draws all 
questions that are in any way concerned with being into the 
indeterminate. 

In the present attempt at an “introduction to metaphysics” 
I shall keep this confused state of affairs in mind. 

In the current interpretation the “question of being” sig- 
nifies the inquiry into the essent as such (metaphysics). But 
from the standpoint of Sein und Zeit, the “question of being” 
means the inquiry into being as such. This signification of the 
title is also the appropriate one from the standpoint of the 
subject matter and of linguistics; for the “question of being” 
in the sense of the metaphysical question regarding the essent 
as such does not inquire thematically into being. In this way 
of asking, being remains forgotten. 

But just as ambiguous as the “question of being” referred 
to in the title is what is said about “forgetfulness of being.” 
It is pointed out—quite correctly—that metaphysics inquires 
into the being of the essent and that it is therefore an obvious 
absurdity to impute a forgetfulness of being to metaphysics. 

But if we consider the question of being in the sense of an 
inquiry into being as such, it becomes clear to anyone who 
follows our thinking that being as such is precisely hidden 


16 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


from metaphysics, and remains forgotten—and so radically 
that the forgetfulness of being, which itself falls into forget- 
fulness, is the unknown but enduring impetus to metaphysical 
questioning. 

If for the treatment of the “question of being" in the in- 
determinate sense we choose the name “metaphysics,” then 
the title of the present work is ambiguous. For at first sight 
the questioning seems to remain within the sphere of the 
essent as such, yet at the very first sentence it strives to de- 
part from this sphere in order to consider and inquire into 
another realm. Actually the title of the work is deliberately 
ambiguous. 

The fundamental question of this work is of a different 
kind from the leading question of metaphysics. Taking what 
was said in Sein und. Zeit (pp. 21 f. and 37 f.) as a starting 
point, we inquired into the "disclosure of being." *Disclosure 
of being" means the unlocking of what forgetfulness of being 
closes and hides. And it is through this questioning that a 
light first falls on the essence of metaphysics that had hitherto 
also been hidden.] 

"Introduction to metaphysics" means accordingly: an intro- 
duction to the asking of the fundamental question. But ques- 
tions and particularly fundamental questions do not just occur 
like stones and water. Questions are not found ready-made 
like shoes and clothes and books. Questions are, and are only 
as they are actually asked. A leading into the asking of the 
fundamental questions is consequently not a going to some- 
thing that lies and stands somewhere; no, this leading-to must 
first awaken and create the questioning. The leading is itself 
a questioning advance, a preliminary questioning. It is a lead- 
ing for which in the very nature of things there can be no fol- 
lowing. When we hear of disciples, "followers," as in a school 
of philosophy for example, it means that the nature of ques- 
tioning is misunderstood. Such schools can exist only in the 
domain of scientific and technical work. Here everything has 
its definite hierarchical order. This work is also an indispen- 
sable part of philosophy and has today been lost. But the best 
technical ability can never replace the actual power of seeing 
and inquiring and speaking. 

“Why are there essents rather than nothing?" That is the 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 17 


question. To state the interrogative sentence, even in a tone 
of questioning, is not yet to question. To repeat the interroga- 
tive sentence several times in succession does not necessarily 
breathe life into the questioning; on the contrary, saying the 
sentence over and over may well dull the questioning. 

But even though the interrogative sentence is not the ques- 
tion and not the questioning, it must not be taken as a mere 
linguistic form of communication, as though, for example, 
the interrogative sentence were only a statement "about" a 
question. When I say to you “Why are there essents rather 
than nothing?" the purpose of my speaking and questioning 
is not to communicate to you the fact that a process of ques- 
tioning is now at work within me. The spoken interrogative 
sentence can of course be interpreted in this way, but this 
means precisely that the questioning has not been heard. In 
this case you do not join me in questioning, nor do you ques- 
tion yourself. No sign of a questioning attitude or state of mind 
is awakened. Such a state of mind consists in a willing to know. 
Willing—that is no mere wishing or striving. Those who wish 
to know also seem to question; but they do not go beyond the 
stating of the question; they stop precisely where the question 
begins. To question is to will to know. He who wills, he who 
puts his whole existence into a will, is resolved. Resolve does 
not shift about; it does not shirk, but acts from out of the 
moment and never stops. Re-solve is no mere decision to act, 
but the crucial beginning of action that anticipates and reaches 
through all action. To will is to be resolved. [The essence of 
willing is here carried back to determination ( Ent-schlossen- 
heit, unclosedness). But the essence of resolve lies in the 
opening, the coming-out-of-cover ( Ent-borgenheit ) of human 
being-there into the clearing of being, and not in a storing 
up of energy for “action.” See Sein und Zeit, § 44 and § 6o. 
But its relation to being is one of letting-be. The idea that all 
willing should be grounded in letting-be offends the under- 
standing. See my lecture Vom Wesen der Wahrheit, 1930.] 

But to know means: to be able to stand in the truth. Truth 
is the manifestness of the essent. To know is accordingly the 
ability to stand (stehen ) in the manifestness of the essent, to 
endure (bestehen) it. Merely to have information, however 
abundant, is not to know. Even if curricula and examination 


18 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


requirements concentrate this information into what is of the 
greatest practical importance, it still does not amount to knowl- 
edge. Even if this information, pruned down to the most in- 
dispensable needs, is “close to life,” its possession is not knowl- 
edge. The man who possesses such information and has learned 
a few practical tricks, will still be perplexed in the presence 
of real reality, which is always different from what the phi- 
listine means by down-to-earth; he will always be a bungler. 
Why? Because he has no knowledge, for to know means to 
be able to learn. 

In the common-sense view, to be sure, knowledge belongs 
to the man who has no further need to learn because he has 
finished learning. No, only that man is knowing who under- 
stands that he must keep learning over and over again and 
who above all, on the basis of this understanding, has attained 
to the point where he is always able to learn. 'This is much 
more difficult than to possess information. 

Ability to learn presupposes ability to inquire. Inquiry is 
the willing-to-know analyzed above: the resolve to be able 
to stand in the openness of the essent. Since we are concerned 
with the asking of the question that is first in rank, clearly the 
willing as well as the knowing is of a very special kind. So 
much the less will the interrogative sentence, even if it is ut- 
tered in an authentically questioning tone and even if the 
listener joins in the questioning, exhaustively reproduce the 
question. The questioning, which indeed is sounded in the 
interrogative sentence but which is still enclosed, wrapped 
up in the words, remains to be unwrapped. The questioning 
attitude must clarify and secure itself in this process, it must 
be consolidated by training. 

Our next task lies in the development of the question ^Why 
are there essents rather than nothing?" In what direction can 
it be asked? First of all the question is accessible in the inter- 
rogative sentence, which gives a kind of approximation of it. 
Hence its linguistic formulation must be correspondingly broad 
and loose. Let us consider our sentence in this respect. “Why 
are there essents rather than nothing?" The sentence has a 
caesura. “Why are there essents?" With these words the ques- 
tion is actually asked. The formulation of the question in- 
cludes: 1) a definite indication of what is put into question, 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 19 


of what is questioned; 2) an indication of what the question 
is about, of what is asked. For it is clearly indicated what the 
question is about, namely the essent. What is asked after, 
that which is asked, is the why, i.e. the ground. What follows 
in the interrogative sentence, “rather than nothing,” is only 
an appendage, which may be said to turn up of its own ac- 
cord if for purposes of introduction we permit ourselves to 
speak loosely, a turn of phrase that says nothing further about 
the question or the object of questioning, an ornamental flour- 
ish. Actually the question is far more unambiguous and defi- 
nite without such an appendage, which springs only from the 
prolixity of loose discourse. “Why are there essents?" The 
addition “rather than nothing” is dropped not only because 
we are striving for a strict formulation of the question but even 
more because it says nothing. For why should we go on to ask 
about nothing? Nothing is simply nothing. Here there is noth- 
ing more to inquire about. And above all, in talking about 
nothing or nothingness, we are not making the slightest ad- 
vance toward the knowledge of the essent. 

He who speaks of nothing does not know what he is doing. 
In speaking of nothing he makes it into a something. In speak- 
ing he speaks against what he intended. He contradicts him- 
self. But discourse that contradicts itself offends against the 
fundamental rule of discourse (logos), against “logic.” To 
speak of nothing is illogical. He who speaks and thinks illogi- 
cally is unscientific. But he who goes so far as to speak of 
nothing in the realm of philosophy, where logic has its very 
home, exposes himself most particularly to the accusation of 
offending against the fundamental rule of all thinking. Such 
a speaking about nothing consists entirely of meaningless 
propositions. Moreover: he who takes the nothing seriously 
is allying himself with nothingness. He is patently promoting 
the spirit of negation and serving the cause of disintegration. 
Not only is speaking of nothing utterly repellent to thought; 
it also undermines all culture and all faith. What disregards 
the fundamental law of thought and also destroys faith and 
the will to build is pure nihilism. 

On the basis of such considerations we shall do well, in 
our interrogative sentence, to cross out the superfluous words 


20 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


“rather than nothing" and limit the sentence to the simple and 
strict form: ^Why are there essents?" 

To this there would be no objection if . . . if in formulat- 
ing our question, if altogether, in the asking of this question, 
we were as free as it may have seemed to us up to this point. 
But in asking this question we stand in a tradition. For phi- 
losophy has always, from time immemorial, asked about the 
ground of what is. With this question it began and with this 
question it will end, provided that it ends in greatness and 
not in an impotent decline. Ever since the question about the 
essent began, the question about the nonessent, about nothing, 
has gone side by side with it. And not only outwardly, in the 
manner of a by-product. Rather, the question about nothing 
has been asked with the same breadth, depth, and originality 
as the question about the essent. The manner of asking about 
nothing may be regarded as a gauge and hallmark for the 
manner of asking about the essent. 

If we bear this in mind, the interrogative sentence uttered 
in the beginning, ^Why are there essents rather than nothing?" 
seems to express the question about the essent far more ade- 
quately than the abbreviated version. It is not looseness of 
speech or prolixity that leads us to mention nothing. Nor is it 
an invention of ours; no, it is only strict observance of the 
original tradition regarding the meaning of the fundamental 
question. 

Still, this speaking of nothing remains in general repellent 
to thought and in particular demoralizing. But what if both 
our concern for the fundamental rules of thought and our 
fear of nihilism, which both seem to counsel against speaking 
of nothing, should be based on a misunderstanding? And this 
indeed is the case. True, this misunderstanding is not acci- 
dental. It is rooted in long years of failure to understand the 
question about the essent. And this failure to understand arises 
from an increasingly hardened forgetfulness of being. 

For it cannot be decided out of hand whether logic and its 
fundamental rules can, altogether, provide a standard for deal- 
ing with the question about the essent as such. It might be 
the other way around. Perhaps the whole body of logic as it 
is known to us, perhaps all the logic that we treat as a gift 
from heaven, is grounded in a very definite answer to the 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 21 


question about the essent; perhaps, in consequence, all think- 
ing which solely follows the laws of thought prescribed by 
traditional logic is incapable from the very start of even un- 
derstanding the question about the essent by its own re- 
sources, let alone actually unfolding the question and guiding 
it toward an answer. Actually it is only an appearance of 
strict, scientific method when we invoke the principle of con- 
tradiction and logic in general, in order to prove that all 
thinking and speaking about nothing are contradictory and 
therefore meaningless. In such a contention "logic" is re- 
garded as a court of justice, established for all eternity, whose 
rights as first and last authority no rational man will impugn. 
Anyone who speaks against logic is therefore tacitly or ex- 
plicitly accused of irresponsibility. And the mere accusation 
is taken as a proof and an argument relieving one of the need 
for any further, genuine reflection. 

It is perfectly true that we cannot talk about nothing, as 
though it were a thing like the rain outside or a mountain or 
any object whatsoever. In principle, nothingness remains in- 
accessible to science. The man who wishes truly to speak 
about nothing must of necessity become unscientific. But this 
is a misfortune only so long as one supposes that scientific 
thinking is the only authentic rigorous thought, and that it 
alone can and must be made into the standard of philosophi- 
cal thinking. But the reverse is true. All scientific thought is 
merely a derived form of philosophical thinking, which pro- 
ceeded to freeze into its scientific cast. Philosophy never arises 
out of science or through science and it can never be accorded 
equal rank with the sciences. No, it is prior in rank, and not 
only "logically" or in a table representing the system of the 
sciences. Philosophy stands in a totally different realm and 
order. Only poetry stands in the same order as philosophy 
and its thinking, though poetry and thought are not the same 
thing. To speak of nothing will always remain a horror and 
an absurdity for science. But aside from the philosopher, the 
poet can do so—and not because, as common sense supposes, 
poetry is without strict rules, but because the spirit of poetry 
(only authentic and great poetry is meant) is essentially su- 
perior to the spirit that prevails in all mere science. By virtue 
of this superiority the poet always speaks as though the essent 


22 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


were being expressed and invoked for the first time. Poetry, 
like the thinking of the philosopher, has always so much world 
space to spare that in it each thing—a tree, a mountain, a 
house, the cry of a bird—loses all indifference and common- 
placeness. 

Authentic speaking about nothing always remains extraor- 
dinary. It cannot be vulgarized. It dissolves if it is placed in 
the cheap acid of a merely logical intelligence. Consequently 
true discourse about nothing can never be immediate like 
the description of a picture for example. Here I should like 
to cite a passage from one of Knut Hamsun's last works, The 
Road Leads On. The work forms a whole with Vagabonds and 
August. It describes the last years and end of this August, 
who embodies the uprooted modern man who can do every- 
thing equally well yet who cannot lose his ties with the extra- 
ordinary, because even in his weakness and despair he re- 
mains authentic and superior. In his last days August is alone 
in the high mountains. And the poet says: “Here he sits be- 
tween his ears and all he hears is emptiness. An amusing 
conception, indeed. On the sea there were both motion and 
sound, something for the ear to feed upon, a chorus of waters. 
Here nothingness meets nothingness and the result is zero, 
not even a hole. Enough to make one shake one's head, ut- 
terly at a loss." 

We see that there is something very interesting about noth- 
ing. Let us then go back to our interrogative sentence; let us 
ask it through, and see whether this "rather than nothing" is 
merely a meaningless appendage or whether it does not have 
an essential meaning even in our provisional statement of the 
question. 

Let us begin with the abbreviated, seemingly simpler, and 
ostensibly stricter form of the question: ^Why are there es- 
sents?” When we inquire in this way, we start from the es- 
sent. The essent is. It is given, it confronts us; accordingly, 
it is to be found at any time, and it is, in certain realms, 
known to us. Now this essent, from which we start, is imme- 
diately questioned as to its ground. The questioning advances 
immediately toward a ground. Such a method is only an ex- 


* Knut Hamsun, The Road Leads On (Coward-McCann, 1934), 
p. 508. Trans. Eugene Gay-Tifft. 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 23 


tension and enlargement, so to speak, of a method practiced 
in everyday life. Somewhere in the vineyard, for example, 
the vine-disease occurs; something incontestably present. We 
ask: where does it come from, where and what is the reason 
for it, the ground? Similarly the essent as a whole is present. 
We ask: where and what is the ground? This manner of ques- 
lioning is represented in the simple formula: Why are there 
essents? Where and what is their ground? Tacitly we are ask- 
ing after another and higher kind of essent. But here the 
question is not by any means concerned with the essent as 
such and as a whole. 

But if we put the question in the form of our original inter- 
rogative sentence: "Why are there essents rather than noth- 
ing?" this addition prevents us in our questioning from be- 
ginning directly with an unquestionably given essent and, 
having scarcely begun, from continuing on to another ex- 
pected essent as a ground. Instead this essent, through ques- 
tioning, is held out into the possibility of nonbeing. Thereby 
the why takes on a very different power and penetration. Why 
is the essent torn away from the possibility of nonbeing? 
Why does it not simply keep falling back into nonbeing? 
Now the essent is no longer that which just happens to be 
present; it begins to waver and oscillate, regardless of whether 
or not we recognize the essent in all certainty, regardless of 
whether or not we apprehend it in its full scope. Henceforth 
the essent as such oscillates, insofar as we draw it into the 
question. The swing of the pendulum extends to the extreme 
and sharpest contrary possibility, to nonbeing and nothing- 
ness. And the search for the why undergoes a parallel change. 
It does not aim simply at providing an also present ground 
and explanation for what is present; now a ground is sought 
which will explain the emergence of the essent as an over- 
coming of nothingness. The ground that is now asked after 
is the ground of the decision for the essent over against noth- 
ingness, or more precisely, the ground for the oscillation of 
the essent, which sustains and unbinds us, half being, half 
not being, which is also why we can belong entirely to no 
thing, not even to ourselves; yet being-there ( Dasein } is in 
every case mine. 

[The qualification *in every case mine" means that being- 


24 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


there is allotted to me in order that my self should be being- 
there. But being-there signifies: care of the ecstatically mani- 
fested being of the essent as such, not only of human being. 
Being-there is “in every case mine"; this means neither “posited 
through me" nor “apportioned to an individual ego." Being- 
there is itself by virtue of its essential relation to being in 
general. That is the meaning of the sentence that occurs fre- 
quently in Sein und Zeit: Being-there implies awareness of 
being.] 

It is already becoming clearer that this "rather than noth- 
ing" is no superfluous appendage to the real question, but is 
an essential component of the whole interrogative sentence, 
which as a whole states an entirely different question from 
that intended in the question "Why are there essents?" With 
our question we place ourselves in the essent in such a way 
that it loses its self-evident character as the essent. The essent 
begins to waver between the broadest and most drastic ex- 
tremes: "either essents—or nothing"—and thereby the ques- 
tioning itself loses all solid foundation. Our questioning 
being-there is suspended, and in this suspense is nevertheless 
self-sustained. 

But the essent is not changed by our questioning. It remains 
what it is and as it is. Our questioning is after all only a 
psycho-spiritual process in us which, whatever course it may 
take, cannot in any way affect the essent itself. True, the 
essent remains as it is manifested to us. But it cannot slough 
off the problematic fact that it might also not be what it is 
and as it is. We do not experience this possibility as something 
that we add to the essent by thinking; rather, the essent itself 
elicits this possibility, and in this possibility reveals itself. Our 
questioning only opens up the horizon, in order that the es- 
sent may dawn in such questionableness. 

We still know far too little about the process of such ques- 
tioning, and what we do know is far too crude. In this ques- 
tioning we seem to belong entirely to ourselves. Yet it is this 
questioning that moves us into the open, provided that in 
questioning it transform itself (which all true questioning 
does), and cast a new space over everything and into every- 
thing. 


The main thing is not to let ourselves be led astray by over- 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 25 


hasty theories, but to experience things as they are on the 
basis of the first thing that comes to hand. This piece of chalk 
has extension; it is a relatively solid, grayish white thing with 
a definite shape, and apart from all that, it is a thing to write 
with. This particular thing has the attribute of lying here; 
but just as surely, it has the attribute of potentially not lying 
here and not being so large. The possibility of being guided 
along the blackboard and of being used up is not something 
that we add to the thing by thought. Itself, as this essent, is 
in this possibility; otherwise it would not be chalk as a writ- 
ing material. Correspondingly, every essent has in it this po- 
tentiality in a different way. This potentiality belongs to the 
chalk. It has in itself a definite aptitude for a definite use. 
True, we are accustomed and inclined, in seeking this po- 
tentiality in the chalk, to say that we cannot see or touch it. 
But that is a prejudice, the elimination of which is part of 
the unfolding of our question. For the present our question 
is only to open up the essent in its wavering between non- 
being and being. Insofar as the essent resists the extreme 
possibility of nonbeing, it stands in being, but it has never 
caught up with or overcome the possibility of nonbeing. 

We suddenly find ourselves speaking of the nonbeing and 
being of the essent, without saying how this being or non- 
being is related to the essent. Are the two terms the same? 
The essent and its being? What, for example, is "the essent" 
in this piece of chalk? The very question is ambiguous, be- 
cause the word "the essent" can be understood in two re- 
spects, like the Greek to on. The essent means first that which 
is at any time, in particular this grayish white, so-and-so- 
shaped, light, brittle mass. But "the essent" also means that 
which “brings it about," so to speak, that this thing is an es- 
sent rather than a nonessent, that which constitutes its being 
if it is. In accordance with this twofold meaning of the word 
*the essent," the Greek to on often has the second significance, 
not the essent itself, not that which is, but "is-ness," essent- 
ness, being. Over against this, "the essent" in the first sense 
signifies all or particular essent things themselves, in respect 
to themselves and not to their is-ness, their ousia. 

The first meaning of to on refers to ta onta (entia), the 
second to £o einai (esse). We have listed what the essent is 


26 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


in the piece of chalk. This was relatively easy to do. It was 
also easy to see that the object named can also not be, that 
this chalk need ultimately not be here and not be. What 
then is being in distinction to what can stand in being or 
fall back into nonbeing—what is being in distinction to the 
essent? Is it the same as the essent? We ask the question once 
again. But in the foregoing we did not list being; we listed 
only material mass, grayish-white light, so-and-so-shaped, 
brittle. But where is the being situated? It must belong to 
the chalk, for this chalk is. 

We encounter the essent everywhere; it sustains and drives 
us, enchants and fills us, elevates and disappoints us; but with 
all this, where is, and wherein consists, the being of the es- 
sent? One might reply: this distinction between the essent 
and its being may occasionally have an importance from the 
standpoint of language and even of meaning; this distinction 
can be effected in mere thought, i.e. in ideas and opinions, 
but is it certain that anything essent in the essent corresponds 
to the distinction? And even this merely cogitated distinction 
is questionable; for it remains unclear what is to be thought 
under the name of “being.” Meanwhile it suffices to know the 
essent and secure our mastery over it. To go further and in- 
troduce being as distinct from it is artificial and leads to 
nothing. 

We have already said a certain amount about this frequent 
question: What comes of such distinctions? Here we are go- 
ing to concentrate on our undertaking. We ask: ^Why are 
there essents rather than nothing?" And in this question we 
seemingly stick to the essent and avoid all empty brooding 
about being. But what really are we asking? Why the essent 
as such is. We are asking for the ground of the essent: that 
it is and is what it is, and that there is not rather nothing. 
Fundamentally we are asking about being. But how? We 
are asking about the being of the essent. We are questioning 
the essent in regard to its being. 

But if we persevere in our questioning we shall actually 
be questioning forward, asking about being in respect to its 
ground, even if this question remains undeveloped and it re- 
mains undecided whether being itself is not in itself a ground 
and a sufficient ground. If we regard this question of being 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 27 


as the first question in order of rank, should we ask it with- 
out knowing how it stands with being and how being stands 
in its distinction to the essent? How shall we inquire into, not 
to say find, the ground for the being of the essent, if we 
have not adequately considered and understood being itself? 
This undertaking would be just as hopeless as if someone 
were to try to bring out the cause and ground of a fire, and 
yet claim that he need not worry about the actual course of 
the fire or examine the scene of it. 

Thus it transpires that the question ^Why are there essents 
rather than nothing?" compels us to ask the preliminary ques- 
tion: "How does it stand with being?" 

Here we are asking about something which we barely 
grasp, which is scarcely more than the sound of a word for 
us, and which puts us in danger of serving a mere word idol 
when we proceed with our questioning. Hence it is all the 
more indispensable that we make it clear from the very out- 
set how it stands at present with being and with our under- 
standing of being. And in this connection the main thing is 
to impress it on our experience that we cannot immediately 
grasp the being of the essent itself, either through the essent 
or in the essent—or anywhere else. 

A few examples may be helpful. Over there, across the 
street, stands the high school building. An essent. We can 
look over the building from all sides, we can go in and ex- 
plore it from cellar to attic, and note everything we encounter 
in that building: corridors, staircases, schoolrooms, and their 
equipment. Everywhere we find essents and we even find 
them in a very definite arrangement. Now where is the being 
of this high school? For after all it is. The building is. If any- 
thing belongs to this essent, it is its being; yet we do not find 
the being inside it. 

Nor does the being consist in the fact that we look at the 
essent. The building stands there even if we do not look at 
it. We can find it only because it already is. Moreover, this 
building's being does not by any means seem to be the same 
for everyone. For us, who look at it or ride by, it is different 
than for the pupils who sit in it; not because they see it only 
from within but because for them this building really is what 
it is and as it is. You can, as it were, smell the being of this 


28 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


building in your nostrils. The smell communicates the being 
of this essent far more immediately and truly than any de- 
scription or inspection could ever do. But on the other hand 
the building's being is not based on this odor that is some- 
where in the air. 

How does it stand with being? Can you see being? We see 
essents; this chalk for example. But do we see being as we 
see color and light and shade? Or do we hear, smell, taste, 
feel being? We hear the motorcycle racing through the street. 
We hear the grouse gliding through the forest. But actually 
we hear only the whirring of the motor, the sound the grouse 
makes. As a matter of fact it is difficult to describe even the 
pure sound, and we do not ordinarily do so, because it is not 
what we commonly hear. [From the standpoint of sheer 
sound] we always hear more. We hear the flying bird, even 
though strictly speaking we should say: a grouse is nothing 
audible, it is no manner of tone that fits into a scale. And 
so it is with the other senses. We touch velvet, silk; we see 
them directly as this and that kind of essent, the one different 
from the other. Wherein lies and wherein consists being? 

But we must take a wider look around us and consider the 
lesser and greater circle within which we spend our days 
and hours, wittingly and wittingly, a circle whose limits shift 
continuously and which is suddenly broken through. 

A heavy storm coming up in the mountains “is,” or what 
here amounts to the same thing, “was” during the night. 
Wherein consists its being? 

A distant mountain range under a broad sky . . . It “is.” 
Wherein consists the being? When and to whom does it re- 
veal itself? To the traveler who enjoys the landscape, or to 
the peasant who makes his living in it and from it, or to the 
meteorologist who is preparing a weather report? Who of 
these apprehends being? All and none. Or is what these men 
apprehend of the mountain range under the great sky only 
certain aspects of it, not the mountain range itself as it "is" 
as such, not that wherein its actual being consists? Who may 
be expected to apprehend this being? Or is it a non-sense, 
contrary to the sense of being, to inquire after what is in 
itself, behind those aspects? Does the being lie in the aspects? 

The door of an early romanesque church is an essent. How 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 29 


and to whom is its being revealed? To the connoisseur of art, 
who examines it and photographs it on an excursion, or to 
the abbot who on a holiday passes through this door with his 
monks, or to the children who play in its shadow on a sum- 
mers day? How does it stand with the being of this essent? 

A state—is. By virtue of the fact that the state police arrest 
a suspect, or that so-and-so-many typewriters are clattering 
in a government building, taking down the words of minis- 
ters and state secretaries? Or "is" the state in a conversation 
between the chancellor and the British foreign minister? The 
state is. But where is being situated? Is it situated anywhere 
at all? 

A painting by Van Gogh. A pair of rough peasant shoes, 
nothing else. Actually the painting represents nothing. But 
as to what is in that picture, you are immediately alone with 
it as though you yourself were making your way wearily 
homeward with your hoe on an evening in late fall after the 
last potato fires have died down. What is here? The canvas? 
The brush strokes? The spots of color? 

What in all these things we have just mentioned is the 
being of the essent? We run (or stand) around in the world 
with our silly subtleties and conceit. But where in all this 
is being? 

All the things we have named are and yet—when we wish 
to apprehend being, it is always as though we were reaching 
into the void. The being after which we inquire is almost like 
nothing, and yet we have always rejected the contention that 
the essent in its entirety is not. 

But being remains unfindable, almost like nothing, or ul- 
timately quite so. Then, in the end, the word "being" is no 
more than an empty word. It means nothing real, tangible, 
material Its meaning is an unreal vapor. Thus in the last 
analysis Nietzsche was perfectly right in calling such “high- 
est concepts" as being "the last cloudy streak of evaporating 
reality." Who would want to chase after such a vapor, when 
the very term is merely a name for a great fallacy! "Nothing 
indeed has exercised a more simple power of persuasion 
hitherto than the error of Being. . ."? 


* The Twilight of Idols, Nietzsche's Complete Works, Edinburgh 
and London, 16 (1911), 19, 22. 


30 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


*Being"—a vapor and a fallacy? What Nietzsche says here 
of being is no random remark thrown out in the frenzy of 
preparation for his central, never finished work. No, this was 
his guiding view of being from the earliest days of his philo- 
sophical effort. It is the fundamental support and determinant 
of his philosophy. Yet even now this philosophy holds its 
ground against all the crude importunities of the scribblers 
who cluster round him more numerous with each passing day. 
And so far there seems to be no end in sight to this abuse of 
Nietzsche's work. In speaking here of Nietzsche, we mean 
to have nothing to do with all that-or with blind hero wor- 
ship for that matter. The task in hand is too crucial and at 
the same time too sobering. It consists first of all, if we are 
to gain a true grasp of Nietzsche, in bringing his accomplish- 
ment to a full unfolding. Being a vapor, a fallacy? If this were 
so, the only possible consequence would be to abandon the 
question ^Why are there essents as such and as a whole, 
rather than nothing?" For what good is the question if what 
it inquires into is only a vapor and a fallacy? 

Does Nietzsche speak the truth? Or was he himself only 
the last victim of a long process of error and neglect, but as 
such the unrecognized witness to a new necessity? 

Is it the fault of being that it is so involved? is it the fault 
of the word that it remains so empty? or are we to blame 
that with all our effort, with all our chasing after the essent, 
we have fallen out of being? And should we not say that the 
fault did not begin with us, or with our immediate or more 
remote ancestors, but lies in something that runs through 
Western history from the very beginning, a happening which 
the eyes of all the historians in the world will never perceive, 
but which nevertheless happens, which happened in the past 
and will happen in the future? What if it were possible that 
man, that nations in their greatest movements and traditions, 
are linked to being and yet had long fallen out of being, with- 
out knowing it, and that this was the most powerful and 
most central cause of their decline? (See Sein und Zeit, 8 38, 
in particular pp. 179 f.) 

We do not ask these questions incidentally, and still less 
do they spring from any particular outlook or state of mind; 
no, they are questions to which we are driven by that pre- 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 31 


liminary question which sprang necessarily from our main 
question “How does it stand with beingP"—a sober question 
perhaps, but assuredly a very useless one. And yet a ques- 
tion, the question: is "being" a mere word and its meaning 
a vapor or is it the spiritual destiny of the Western world? 

This Europe, in its ruinous blindness forever on the point 
of cutting its own throat, lies today in a great pincers, squeezed 
between Russia on one side and America on the other. From 
a metaphysical point of view, Russia and America are the 
same; the same dreary technological frenzy, the same unre- 
stricted organization of the average man. At a time when the 
farthermost corner of the globe has been conquered by tech- 
nology and opened to economic exploitation; when any inci- 
dent whatever, regardless of where or when it occurs, can be 
communicated to the rest of the world at any desired speed; 
when the assassination of a king in France and a symphony 
concert in Tokyo can be "experienced" simultaneously; when 
time has ceased to be anything other than velocity, instanta- 
neousness, and simultaneity, and time as history has vanished 
from the lives of all peoples; when a boxer is regarded as a 
nation's great man; when mass meetings attended by millions 
are looked on as a triumph—then, yes then, through all this 
turmoil a question still haunts us like a specter: What for?— 
Whither?—And what then? 

The spiritual decline of the earth is so far advanced that 
the nations are in danger of losing the last bit of spiritual en- 
ergy that makes it possible to see the decline (taken in rela- 
tion to the history of *being"), and to appraise it as such. 
This simple observation has nothing to do with Kulturpes- 
simismus, and of course it has nothing to do with any sort 
of optimism either; for the darkening of the world, the flight 
of the gods, the destruction of the earth, the transformation 
of men into a mass, the hatred and suspicion of everything 
free and creative, have assumed such proportions throughout 
the earth that such childish categories as pessimism and op- 
timism have long since become absurd. 

We are caught in a pincers. Situated in the center, our na- 
tion incurs the severest pressure. It is the nation with the most 
neighbors and hence the most endangered. With all this, it is 
the most metaphysical of nations. We are certain of this vo- 


32 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


cation, but our people will only be able to wrest a destiny 
from it if within itself it creates a resonance, a possibility of 
resonance for this vocation, and takes a creative view of its 
tradition. All this implies that this nation, as a historical na- 
tion, must move itself and thereby the history of the West 
beyond the center of their future "happening" and into the 
primordial realm of the powers of being. If the great decision 
regarding Europe is not to bring annihilation, that decision 
must be made in terms of new spiritual energies unfolding 
historically from out of the center. 

To ask “How does it stand with being?” means nothing 
less than to recapture, to repeat (wieder-holen), the begin- 
ning of our historical-spiritual existence, in order to transform 
it into a new beginning. This is possible. It is indeed the cru- 
cial form of history, because it begins in the fundamental 
event. But we do not repeat a beginning by reducing it to 
something past and now known, which need merely be imi- 
tated; no, the beginning must be begun again, more radically, 
with all the strangeness, darkness, insecurity that attend a 
true beginning. Repetition as we understand it is anything 
but an improved continuation with the old methods of what 
has been up to now. 

The question ^How is it with being?" is included as a pre- 
liminary question in our central question “Why are there es- 
sents rather than nothing?" If we now begin to look into that 
which is questioned in our preliminary question, namely be- 
ing, the full truth of Nietzsche's dictum is at once apparent. 
For if we look closely, what more is “being” to us than a mere 
word, an indeterminate meaning, intangible as a vapor? Nietz- 
sche's judgment, to be sure, was meant in a purely disparag- 
ing sense. For him “being” is a delusion that should never 
have come about. Is "being," then, indeterminate, vague as 
a vapor? It is indeed. But we do not mean to sidestep this 
fact. On the contrary, we must see how much of a fact it is 
if we are to perceive its full implication. 

Our questioning brings us into the landscape we must in- 
habit as a basic prerequisite, if we are to win back our roots 
in history. We shall have to ask why this fact, that for us 
"being" is no more than a word and a vapor, should have 
arisen precisely today, or whether and why it has existed for 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 33 


a long time. We must learn to see that this fact is not as harm- 
less as it seems at first sight. For ultimately what matters 
is not that the word "being" remains a mere sound and its 
meaning a vapor, but that we have fallen away from what 
this word says and for the moment cannot find our way back; 
that it is for this and no other reason that the word "being" 
no longer applies to anything, that everything, if we merely 
take hold of it, dissolves like a tatter of cloud in the sunlight. 
Because this is so—that is why we ask about being. And we 
ask because we know that truths have never fallen into any 
nation's lap. The fact that people still cannot and do not 
wish to understand this question, even if it is asked in a still 
more fundamental form, deprives the question of none of its 
cogency. 

Of course we can, seemingly with great astuteness and 
perspicacity, revive the old familiar argument to the effect 
that "being" is the most universal of concepts, that it covers 
anything and everything, even the nothing which also, in the 
sense that it is thought or spoken, "is" something. Beyond the 
domain of this most universal concept “being,” there is, in 
the strictest sense of the word, nothing more, on the basis 
of which being itself could be more closely determined. The 
concept of being is an ultimate. Moreover, there is a law of 
logic that says: the more comprehensive a concept is—and 
what could be more comprehensive than the concept of "be- 
ing"?—the more indeterminate and empty is its content. 

For every normally thinking man—and we all should like 
to be normal men-this reasoning is immediately and wholly 
convincing. But the question now arises: does the designation 
of being as the most universal concept strike the essence of 
being, or is it not from the very outset such a misinterpreta- 
tion that all questioning becomes hopeless? This then is the 
question: can being be regarded only as the most universal 
concept which inevitably occurs in all special concepts, or is 
being of an entirely different essence, and hence anything 
but an object of *ontology," provided we take this word in its 
traditional sense? 

The word “ontology” was first coined in the seventeenth 
century. It marks the development of the traditional doctrine 
of the essent into a discipline of philosophy and a branch of 


34 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


the philosophical system. But the traditional doctrine was an 
academic classification and ordering of what for Plato and 
Aristotle and again for Kant was a question, though no longer 
to be sure a primordial one. And it is in this sense that the 
word “ontology” is used today. Under this title each school 
of philosophy has set up and described a branch within its 
system. But we can also take the word "ontology" in the 
"broadest sense," ^without reference to ontological directions 
and tendencies" (cf. Sein und. Zeit, p. 11 top). In this case 
"ontology" signifies the endeavor to make being manifest it- 
self, and to do so by way of the question “how does it stand 
with being?" (and not only with the essent as such). But 
since thus far this question has not even been heard, let 
alone echoed; since it has been expressly rejected by the vari- 
ous schools of academic philosophy, which strive for an “ontol- 
ogy” in the traditional sense, it may be preferable to dispense 
in the future with the terms "ontology" and "ontological." Two 
modes of questioning which, as we now see clearly, are 
worlds apart, should not bear the same name. 

We ask the questions “How does it stand with being?" 
“What is the meaning of being?” nof in order to set up an 
ontology on the traditional style, much less to criticize the 
past mistakes of ontology. We are concerned with something 
totally different: to restore man's historical being-there—and 
that always includes our own future being-there in the totality 
of the history allotted to us—to the domain of being, which it 
was originally incumbent on man to open up for himself. All 
this, to be sure, in the limits within which philosophy can ac- 
complish anything. 

Out of the fundamental question of metaphysics, ^Why 
are there essents rather than nothing?" we have separated 
the preliminary question, ^How does it stand with being?" 
The relation between the two questions requires clarification, 
for it is of a special kind. Ordinarily a preliminary question 
is dealt with before and outside the main question, though in 
reference to it. But, in principle, philosophical questions are 
never dealt with as though we might some day cast them 
aside. Here the preliminary question is not by any means out- 
side of the main question; rather, it is the flame which burns 
as it were in the asking of the fundamental question; it is the 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 35 


flaming center of all questioning. That is to say: it is crucial 
for the first asking of the fundamental question that in asking 
its preliminary question we derive the decisive fundamental 
attitude that is here essential. That is why we have related 
the question of being to the destiny of Europe, where the 
destiny of the earth is being decided—while our own historic 
being-there proves to be the center for Europe itself. 

The question is: 

Is being a mere word and its meaning a vapor, or does what 
is designated by the word “being” hold within it the historical 
destiny of the West? 

To many ears the question may sound violent and exag- 
gerated: for one might in a pinch suppose that a discussion 
of the question of being might be related in some very remote 
and indirect way to the decisive historical question of the 
earth, but assuredly not that the basic position and attitude 
of our questioning might be directly determined by the his- 
tory of the human spirit on earth. And yet this relationship 
exists. Since our purpose is to set in motion the asking of the 
preliminary question, we must now show that, and to what 
extent, the asking of this question is an immediate and funda- 
mental factor in the crucial historical question. For this dem- 
onstration it is necessary to anticipate an essential insight in 
the form of an assertion. 

We maintain that this preliminary question and with it 
the fundamental question of metaphysics are historical ques- 
tions through and through. But do not metaphysics and phi- 
losophy thereby become a historical science? Historical sci- 
ence after all investigates the temporal, while philosophy 
investigates the timeless. Philosophy is historical only insofar 
as it-like every work of the spirit—realizes itself in time. But 
in this sense the designation of metaphysical questioning as 
historical cannot characterize metaphysics, but merely ex- 
presses something obvious. Accordingly, the assertion is either 
meaningless and superfluous or else impossible, because it 
creates an amalgam of two fundamentally different kinds of 
science: philosophy and historical science. 

In answer to this it must be said: 

1. Metaphysics and philosophy are not sciences at all, and 


36 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


the fact that their questioning is basically historical cannot 
make them so. 

2. Historical science does not determine a fundamental 
relation to history, but always presupposes such a relation. 
It is only for this reason that historical science can distort 
men's relation to history, which itself is always historical; or 
misinterpret it and degrade it to a mere knowledge of an- 
tiquities; or else deal with crucial fields in the light of this 
once established relation to history, and so produce cogent 
history. A historical relation between our historical being- 
there and history may become an object of knowledge and 
mark an advanced state of knowledge; but it need not. More- 
over, all relations to history cannot be scientifically objectified 
and given a place in science, and it is precisely the essential 
ones that cannot. Historical science can never produce the 
historical relation to history. It can only illuminate a relation 
once supplied, ground it in knowledge, which is indeed an 
absolute necessity for the historical being-there of a wise 
people, and not either an "advantage" or a "disadvantage." 
Because it is only in philosophy—as distinguished from all sci- 
ence—that essential relations to the realm of what is take 
shape, this relation can, indeed must, for us today be a funda- 
mentally historical one. 

But for an understanding of our assertion that the “meta- 
physical" asking of the preliminary question is historical 
through and through, it is above all necessary to consider 
this: for us history is not synonymous with the past; for the 
past is precisely what is no longer happening. And much less 
is history the merely contemporary, which never happens but 
merely "passes," comes and goes by. History as happening 
is an acting and being acted upon which pass through the 
present, which are determined from out of the future, and 
which take over the past. It is precisely the present that van- 
ishes in happening. 

Our asking of the fundamental question of metaphysics is 
historical because it opens up the process of human being- 
there in its essential relations—i.e. its relations to the essent 
as such and as a whole—opens it up to unasked possibilities, 
futures, and at the same time binds it back to its past begin- 
ning, so sharpening it and giving it weight in its present. In 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 37 


this questioning our being-there is summoned to its history 
in the full sense of the word, called to history and to a deci- 
sion in history. And this not after the fact, in the sense that 
we draw ethical, ideological lessons from it. No, the basic 
attitude of the questioning is in itself historical; it stands and 
maintains itself in happening, inquiring out of happening for 
the sake of happening. 

But we have not yet come to the essential reason why this 
inherently historical asking of the question about being is 
actually an integral part of history on earth. We have said 
that the world is darkening. The essential episodes of this 
darkening are: the flight of the gods, the destruction of the 
earth, the standardization of man, the pre-eminence of the 
mediocre. 

What do we mean by world when we speak of a darkening 
of the world? World is always world of the spirit. The animal 
has no world nor any environment ( Umwelt). Darkening of 
the world means emasculation of the spirit, the disintegration, 
wasting away, repression, and misinterpretation of the spirit. 
We shall attempt to explain the emasculation of the spirit 
in one respect, that of misinterpretation. We have said: Eu- 
rope lies in a pincers between Russia and America, which are 
metaphysically the same, namely in regard to their world 
character and their relation to the spirit. What makes the 
situation of Europe all the more catastrophic is that this en- 
feeblement of the spirit originated in Europe itself and— 
though prepared by earlier factors—was definitively deter- 
mined by its own spiritual situation in the first half of the 
nineteenth century. It was then that occurred what is popu- 
larly and succinctly called the *collapse of German idealism." 
This formula is a kind of shield behind which the already 
dawning spiritlessness, the dissolution of the spiritual energies, 
the rejection of all original inquiry into grounds and men's 
bond with the grounds, are hidden and masked. It was not 
German idealism that collapsed; rather, the age was no longer 
strong enough to stand up to the greatness, breadth, and 
originality of that spiritual world, i.e. truly to realize it, for 
to realize a philosophy means something very different from 
applying theorems and insights. The lives of men began to 
slide into a world which lacked that depth from out of which 


38 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


the essential always comes to man and comes back to man, 
so compelling him to become superior and making him act 
in conformity to a rank. All things sank to the same level, a 
surface resembling a blind mirror that no longer reflects, that 
casts nothing back. The prevailing dimension became that 
of extension and number. Intelligence no longer meant a 
wealth of talent, lavishly spent, and the command of ener- 
gies, but only what could be learned by everyone, the practice 
of a routine, always associated with a certain amount of sweat 
and a certain amount of show. In America and in Russia this 
development grew into a boundless etcetera of indifference 
and always-the-sameness—so much so that the quantity took 
on a quality of its own. Since then the domination in those 
countries of a cross section of the indifferent mass has be- 
come something more than a dreary accident. It has become 
an active onslaught that destroys all rank and every world- 
creating impulse of the spirit, and calls it a lie. This is the 
onslaught of what we call the demonic (in the sense of de- 
structive evil). There are many indications of the emergence 
of this demonism, identical with the increasing helplessness 
and uncertainty of Europe against it and within itself. One 
of these signs is the emasculation of the spirit through misin- 
terpretation; we are still in the midst of this process. This 
misinterpretation of the spirit may be described briefly in 
four aspects. 

1. The crux of the matter is the reinterpretation of the 
spirit as intelligence, or mere cleverness in examining and 
calculating given things and the possibility of changing them 
and complementing them to make new things. This cleverness 
is a matter of mere talent and practice and mass division of 
labor. The cleverness itself is subject to the possibility of or- 
ganization, which is never true of the spirit. The attitude of the 
littérateur and esthete is merely a late consequence and vari- 
ation of the spirit falsified into intelligence. Mere intelligence 
is a semblance of spirit, masking its absence. 

2. The spirit falsified into intelligence thus falls to the level 
of a tool in the service of others, a tool the manipulation of 
which can be taught and learned. Whether this use of intel- 
ligence relates to the regulation and domination of the ma- 
terial conditions of production (as in Marxism) or in general 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 39 


to the intelligent ordering and explanation of everything that 
is present and already posited at any time (as in positivism), 
or whether it is applied to the organization and regulation of 
a nation's vital resources and race—in any case the spirit as 
intelligence becomes the impotent superstructure of something 
else, which, because it is without spirit or even opposed to 
the spirit, is taken for the actual reality. If the spirit is taken 
as intelligence, as is done in the most extreme form of Marx- 
ism, then it is perfectly correct to say, in defense against it, 
that in the order of the effective forces of human being-there, 
the spirit, ie. intelligence, must always be ranked below 
healthy physical activity and character. But this order be- 
comes false once we understand the true essence of the spirit. 
For all true power and beauty of the body, all sureness and 
boldness in combat, all authenticity and inventiveness of the 
understanding, are grounded in the spirit and rise or fall 
only through the power or impotence of the spirit. The spirit 
is the sustaining, dominating principle, the first and the last, 
not merely an indispensable third factor. 

3. As soon as the misinterpretation sets in that degrades 
the spirit to a tool, the energies of the spiritual process, po- 
etry and art, statesmanship and religion, become subject to con- 
scious cultivation and planning. They are split into branches. 
The spiritual world becomes culture and the individual strives 
to perfect himself in the creation and preservation of this cul- 
ture. These branches become fields of free endeavor, which 
sets its own standards and barely manages to live up to them. 
These standards of production and consumption are called 
values. The cultural values preserve their meaning only by 
restricting themselves to an autonomous field: poetry for the 
sake of poetry, art for the sake of art, science for the sake of 
science. 

Let us consider the example of science, which is of particu- 
lar concern to us here at the university. The state of science 
since the turn of the century—it has remained unchanged de- 
spite a certain amount of house cleaning—is easy to see. 
Though today two seemingly different conceptions of science 
seem to combat one another—science as technical, practical, 
professional knowledge and science as cultural value per se— 
both are moving along the same downgrade of misinterpreta- 


40 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


tion and emasculation of the spirit. They differ only in this: 
in the present situation the technical, practical conception of 
science as specialization can at least lay claim to frank and 
clear consistency, while the reactionary interpretation of sci- 
ence as a cultural value, now making its reappearance, seeks 
to conceal the impotence of the spirit behind an unconscious 
lie. The confusion of spiritlessness can even go so far as to 
lead the upholders of the technical, practical view of science 
to profess their belief in science as a cultural value; then the 
two understand each other perfectly in the same spiritless- 
ness. We may choose to call the institution where the spe- 
cialized sciences are grouped together for purposes of teach- 
ing and research a university, but this is no more than a name; 
the "university" has ceased to be a fundamental force for 
unity and responsibility. What I said here in 1929, in my 
inaugural address, is still true of the German university: “The 
scientific fields are still far apart. Their subjects are treated 
in fundamentally different ways. Today this hodgepodge of 
disciplines is held together only by the technical organiza- 
tion of the universities and faculties and preserves what mean- 
ing it has only through the practical aims of the different 
branches. The sciences have lost their roots in their essential 
ground." (Was ist MetaphysikP 1929, p. 8.) Science today 
in all its branches is a technical, practical business of gaining 
and transmitting information. Àn awakening of the spirit can- 
not take its departure from such science. It is itself in need of 
an awakening. 

4. The last misinterpretation of the spirit is based on the 
above-mentioned falsifications which represent the spirit as 
intelligence, and intelligence as a serviceable tool which, along 
with its product, is situated in the realm of culture. In the 
end the spirit as utilitarian intelligence and the spirit as cul- 
ture become holiday ornaments cultivated along with many 
other things. They are brought out and exhibited as a proof 
that there is no intention to combat culture or favor barba- 
rism. In the beginning Russian Communism took a purely nega- 
tive attitude but soon went over to propagandist tactics of 
this kind. 

In opposition to this multiple misinterpretation of the 
spirit, we define the essence of the spirit briefly as follows 


THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION 41 


(I shall quote from the address I delivered on the occasion 
of my appointment as rector, because of its succinct formula- 
tion): "Spirit is neither empty cleverness nor the irresponsible 
play of the wit, nor the boundless work of dismemberment 
carried on by the practical intelligence; much less is it world- 
reason; no, spirit is a fundamental, knowing resolve toward 
the essence of being." (Rektoratsrede, p. 13.) Spirit is the 
mobilization of the powers of the essent as such and as a 
whole. Where spirit prevails, the essent as such becomes al- 
ways and at all times more essent. Thus the inquiry into the 
essent as such and as a whole, the asking of the question of 
being, is one of the essential and fundamental conditions for 
an awakening of the spirit and hence for an original world of 
historical being-there. It is indispensable if the peril of world 
darkening is to be forestalled and if our nation in the center 
of the Western world is to take on its historical mission. Here 
we can explain only in these broad outlines why the asking 
of the question of being is in itself through and through his- 
torical, and why, accordingly, our question as to whether 
being will remain a mere vapor for us or become the destiny 
of the West is anything but an exaggeration and a rhetorical 


figure. 


But.if our question about being has this essential and de- 
cisive character, we must above all take an absolutely serious 
view of the fact that gives the question its immediate neces- 
sity, the fact that for us being has become little more than 
a mere word and its meaning an evanescent vapor. This is 
not the kind of fact which merely confronts us as something 
alien and other, which we need merely note as an occurrence. 
It is a fact in which we stand. It is a state of our being-there. 
And by state, of course, I do not mean a quality that can be 
demonstrated only psychologically. Here state means our en- 
tire constitution, the way in which we ourselves are consti- 
tuted in regard to being. Here we are not concerned with 
psychology but with our history in an essential respect. When 
we call it a “fact” that being for us is a mere word and vapor, 
we are speaking very provisionally. We are merely holding 
fast, establishing something which has not yet been thought 
through, for which we still have no locus, even if it looks as 


42 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


though this something were an occurrence among us, here 
and now, or “in” us, as we like to say. 

One would like to integrate the individual fact that for us 
being remains no more than an empty word and an evanescent 
vapor with the more general fact that many words, and pre- 
cisely the essential ones, are in the same situation; that the 
language in general is worn out and used up—an indispen- 
sable but masterless means of communication that may be 
used as one pleases, as indifferent as a means of public trans- 
port, as a street car which everyone rides in. Everyone speaks 
and writes away in the language, without hindrance and above 
all without danger. That is certainly true. And only a very 
few are capable of thinking through the full implications of 
this misrelation and unrelation of present-day being-there to 
language. 

But the emptiness of the word “being,” the total disappear- 
ance of its appellative force, is not merely a particular in- 
stance of the general exhaustion of language; rather, the de- 
stroyed relation to being as such is the actual reason for the 
general misrelation to language. 

The organizations for the purification of the language and 
defense against its progressive barbarization are deserving of 
respect. But such efforts merely demonstrate all the more 
clearly that we no longer know what is at stake in language. 
Because the destiny of language is grounded in a nation's 
relation to being, the question of being will involve us deeply 
in the question of language. It is more than an outward acci- 
dent that now, as we prepare to set forth, in all its implica- 
tion, the fact of the evaporation of being, we find ourselves 
compelled to take linguistic considerations as our starting 
point. 


22 


ON THE GRAMMAR 
AND ETYMOLOGY OF 
IHE WORD ‘‘BEING’”’ 


If being has become no more for us than an empty word 
and an evanescent significance, we must try at least to cap- 
ture wholly this remaining vestige of significance. With this 
in mind we ask first of all: 

1. What sort of word is "being" in regard to its form? 

2. What does linguistics tell us about the original mean- 
ing of this word? 

To put it in learned terms: we shall inquire into 1) the gram- 
mar and 2) the etymology of the word “being.”* 

The grammar of words is not only and not primarily con- 
cerned with their literal and phonetic form. It takes these 
formal elements as indications of specific directions and dif- 
ferences of direction in the potential meanings of words and 
in the possible ways of employing them in a sentence or larger 
unit of discourse. The words he goes, we went, they have gone, 
go, going, to go are variations of the same word in accordance 
with definite directions of meaning. We know them from the 
titles in grammar books: present indicative, perfect, compound 
past, imperative, present participle, infinitive. But these terms 
ceased long ago to be anything more than technical instru- 
ments with the help of which we mechanically dissect lan- 
guage and set down rules. Precisely where a pristine feeling 
toward language still stirs, we sense the deadness of these 


* On this section cf. Ernst Fraenkel, *Das Sein und seine Modali- 
täten” in Lexis (Studien zur Sprachphilosophie, Sprachgeschichte 
und Begriffsforschung), ed. Johannes Lohmann, 2 (1949), 149. 


44 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


grammatical forms, these mere mechanisms. Language and 
linguistics have been caught fast in these rigid forms, as in a 
steel net. In the barren and spiritless doctrine of the schools, 
these formal concepts and terms of grammar have become 
totally uncomprehended and incomprehensible shells. 

It is assuredly sound that instead of this our school chil- 
dren should learn something about Germanic prehistory and 
early history. But this will sink into the same barrenness un- 
less we succeed in rebuilding the school's spiritual world from 
within and from out of the ground, i.e. in giving the school 
a spiritual, not a scientific, atmosphere. And here the first step 
must be a real revolution in the prevailing relation to lan- 
guage. But to this end we must revolutionize the teachers, 
and for this in turn the university must transform itself and 
learn to understand its task instead of puffing itself up with 
irrelevancies. It no longer even enters our heads that all these 
things we have known so long might be different, that these 
grammatical forms have not from all eternity stood there like 
absolutes, dissecting and regulating language as such, that 
quite on the contrary they grew out of a very definite inter- 
pretation of the Greek and Latin languages. And all this hap- 
pened on the basis of the fact that language too is an essent, 
which like other essents can be made accessible and delim- 
ited in a definite way. Obviously the validity of such an un- 
dertaking and the way in which it was carried out depended 
on the fundamental view of being that guided it. 

The determination of the essence of language, the very in- 
quiry into it, are regulated at all times by the prevailing pre- 
conception about the essence of being and about essence 
itself. But essence and being express themselves in language. 
Here it is important to speak of this connection, because we 
are inquiring into the word "being." If, as is unavoidable at 
the start, we make use of traditional grammar and its forms 
in this grammatical designation of the word, we must, par- 
ticularly in the present case, do so with the basic reservation 
that these grammatical forms are not adequate to our purpose. 
In the course of our investigations the example of a crucial 
grammatical form will demonstrate that this is so. 

But this demonstration will soon go further, dispelling any 
appearance that our aim is to improve on grammar. Our aim, 


GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF "BEING" 45 


rather, is an essential clarification of the essence of being in 
respect to its essential involvement with the essence of lan- 
guage. This must be borne in mind in the following if we 
are not to mistake the linguistic and grammatical investiga- 
tions for a sterile and irrelevant game. We shall inquire 1) 
into the grammar, 2) into the etymology of the word “being.” 


1. The Grammar of the Word “Being” (Sein )* 


What kind of word is "being" in respect to its word form? 
To "being" (das Sein) correspond going, falling, dreaming, 
etc. (das Gehen, das Fallen, das Tráumen ). These linguistic 
entities are nouns like bread, house, grass, thing. But we ob- 
serve at once this difference: that we can easily reduce them 
to the verbs to go, to fall ( gehen, fallen ), etc., which does not 
seem to be possible with the other group. “House,” to be sure, 
has the related form "to house”: “he houses ( dwells) in the 
forest." But the relation of grammar and meaning between 
"going" (das Gehen) and “to go" (gehen) is different from 
that between "the house" and “to house.” On the other hand, 
there are word forms that correspond exactly to our first 
group (going, falling) and yet resemble "bread," "house" in 
word character and meaning. For example: "The ambassador 
gave an Essen" (dinner; infinitive essen, to eat). “He died 
of an incurable Leiden" (illness; infinitive leiden, to suffer). 
We no longer regard these words as pertaining to verbs. From 
the verb a substantive, a name, has developed, and this 
through a definite form of the verb which in Latin is called 
modus infinitivus. 

We find the same relations in connection with our word 
Sein (being). This substantive goes back to the infinitive 
"sein" (to be), which belongs with the forms you are, he is, 
we were, they have been. “Being” as a substantive came out 
of the verb: the word “being” is a “verbal substantive.” The 
mention of this grammatical form completes the linguistic 


* For an understanding of this passage it is necessary to bear in 
mind that in German (as in most Western languages) the verbal 
noun “being” is supplied by an infinitive, Sein, and not, as in Eng- 
lish, by a participial form. (R.M. ) 


46 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


designation of the word *being." These are well-known, self- 
evident things, and we are discussing them at great length. 
But it would be more cautious and correct to say that these 
linguistic, grammatical distinctions are worn-out conventions; 
for they are far from “self-evident.” Consequently we must 
have a look at the grammatical forms in question (verb, sub- 
stantive, substantivization of the verb, infinitive, participle). 

It is easy to see that in the formation of the word form 
“das Sein" (being) the decisive preliminary form is the in- 
finitive “sein” (to be). This form of the verb is transposed 
into the form of a substantive. Verb, infinitive, substantive 
are accordingly the three grammatical forms which determine 
the word character of our word “being” (das Sein). Hence 
it is first of all important to understand the significance of 
these grammatical forms. Two of the three, verb and sub- 
stantive, are among those which were first recognized at the 
beginnings of Western grammar, and which today are still 
regarded as the fundamental forms of words and of grammar. 
Consequently our inquiry into the essence of the substantive 
and the verb takes us into the question of the essence of lan- 
guage. For the question as to whether the original form of 
the word was the noun (substantive) or the verb coincides 
with the question regarding the original character of dis- 
course and speech in general And this question contains 
within it the question of the origin of language. For the pres- 
ent we cannot go into this question directly, but must help 
ourselves with an expedient. We shall limit ourselves for the 
present to the grammatical form which provides a bridge to 
the formation of the verbal substantive, namely the infinitive 
(to go, to come, to fall, to sing, to hope, to be, etc.). 

What does infinitive mean? The word is an abbreviation 
for modus infinitivus, the mode of unlimitedness, indetermi- 
nateness, namely in the manner in which a verb accomplishes 
and indicates its significative function and direction. 

Like all other Latin grammatical terms, this term stems 
from the work of the Greek grammarians. Here again we run 
into the process of translation which we have mentioned in 
connection with the word physis. We need not go into the 
details here of how grammar arose among the Greeks, how 
it was taken over by the Romans and handed on to the Middle 


GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF “BEING” 47 


Ages and the modern era. In regard to this history of gram- 
mar we know a good many details. So far there is no work 
that really penetrates this process, so fundamental to the 
establishment and formation of all Western spirit. We even 
lack an adequate formulation of the problems underlying 
such a study, which must inevitably be undertaken one day, 
remote as this whole matter may seem from current interests. 

What gives this development its entire meaning is that 
Western grammar sprang from the reflection of the Greeks 
on the Greek language. For along with German the Greek 
language is (in regard to its possibilities for thought) at once 
the most powerful and most spiritual of all languages. 

First of all it should be borne in mind that the crucial dif- 
ferentiation of the fundamental forms of words (noun and 
verb) in the Greek form of onoma and rhéma was worked 
out and first established in close connection with an exegesis 
and interpretation of being, which was to exert a determining 
influence on the whole West. The inner bond between these 
two processes has come down to us unimpaired and clearly 
formulated in Plato’s Sophist. The terms onoma and rhéma 
were known to be sure before Plato. But at that time, as with 
Plato, they were taken as names covering the entire usage 
of words. Onoma meant the linguistic appellation in distinc- 
tion to the named person or thing, and took in the utterance 
of a word which was later designated grammatically as rhema. 
And rhéma in turn meant speech, discourse; rhetor was the 
speaker, the orator, who employed not only verbs but also 
onomata in the restricted sense of substantive. 

The fact that the two terms originally covered an equally 
broad field is important for the contention that we shall make 
further on, namely that the question, much discussed in lin- 
guistics, as to whether the noun or the verb is the original 
form of word is no authentic question. This pseudo question 
first grew up in the light of a developed grammar, and not 
from a contemplation of the essence of language as it was 
before the grammarians ripped it apart. 

Subsequently the two terms onoma and rhéma, which origi- 
nally designated all speech, narrowed in meaning and be- 
came terms for the two main classes of words. In Sophist 
(261 e ff.), Plato for the first time gave an interpretation and 


48 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


explanation of this differentiation. He starts from the univer- 
sal designation of the word's function. Onoma in the broader 
sense is deloma tei phonéi peri tén ousian, revelation through 
sound, in respect to and within the area of the being of the 
essent. 

In the realm of the essent a differentiation may be made 
between pragma and praxis. Pragmata are the things with 
which we have to do, with which we are always concerned. 
Praxis is action and activity in the broadest sense, which also 
includes poiésis. Words are of twofold kind (ditton genos). 
They are déloma pragmatos (onoma), revelation of things, 
and déloma praxeós (rhéma), revelation of an action. Where 
a plegma, a symploké (an interweaving of the two) occurs, 
we have the logos elachistos te kai protos, the shortest (and 
yet at the same time) first (authentic) discourse. But it was 
Aristotle who first gave a clearer metaphysical interpreta- 
tion of logos in the sense of statement. He differentiates 
between onoma as sémantikon aneu chronon and rhéma as 
prossemainon chronon (De Interpretatione, c. 2-4). This in- 
terpretation of the essence of logos was taken as a model in 
the subsequent development of logic and grammar. And even 
though grammar degenerated almost immediately into aca- 
demicism, the subject itself retained its crucial importance. For 
over a thousand years the works of the Greek and Latin 
grammarians served as schoolbooks in the Western world. 
We know that these periods were by no means feeble and 
insignificant. 

We are asking about the word form that the Romans called 
infinitivus. In itself the negative form modus infinitivus points 
to a modus finitus, a mode of limitation and determinateness 
of verbal signification. Now what is the Greek prototype for 
this distinction? What the Roman grammarians designated 
by the colorless term modus was for the Greeks enklisis, in- 
clination to the side. This word moves in the same direction 
of meaning as another Greek word indicating grammatical 
form. That is the word known to us from the Latin transla- 
tion, ptdsis, casus, the case in respect to the inflection of the 
noun. But originally ptosis designated any kind of inflection 
of the basic form (deviation, declension), not only in sub- 
stantives but also in verbs. It was only after the difference 


GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF "BEING" 49 


between these word forms had been more clearly worked out 
that their inflections were designated by different terms. The 
inflection of the noun is called ptósis (casus); that of the 
verb enklisis (declinatio). 

Now how did these two particular terms ptósis and enklisis 
come into use in the study of language and its inflections? 
Language is obviously regarded as something that also is, as 
an essent among others. Hence the manner in which the 
Greeks understood the essent in its being was bound to make 
itself felt in their view and definition of language. Only on 
this basis can we understand these terms which, as mood and 
case, have long become threadbare and meaningless for us. 

In this lecture we shall always be coming back to the 
Greeks’ view of being, because this view, though totally 
banalized and unrecognized as Greek, is still the prevailing 
Western view. Since this is true not only in regard to the 
doctrines of philosophy but in the most common and every- 
day matters, we shall attempt, as we examine the Greek view 
of language, to characterize the first fundamentals of the 
Greek view of being. 

This method is chosen intentionally. We hope to show by 
an example drawn from grammar that the determining West- 
ern experience, idea, and interpretation of language have 
grown out of a very definite understanding of being. 

The words ptósis and enklisis mean falling, tipping, in- 
clining. This implies a deviation from standing upright and 
straight. But this erect standing-there, coming up ( zum Stande 
kommen, coming to stand ) and enduring (im Stand bleiben, 
remaining in standing) is what the Greeks understood by 
being. Yet what thus comes up and becomes intrinsically 
stable (ständig) encounters, freely and spontaneously, the 
necessity of its limit, peras. This limit is not something that 
comes to the essent from outside. Still less is it a deficiency 
in the sense of a harmful restriction. No, the hold that gov- 
erns itself from out of the limit, the having-itself, wherein 
the enduring holds itself, is the being of the essent; it is what 
first makes the essent into an essent as differentiated from a 
nonessent. Coming to stand accordingly means: to achieve a 
limit for itself, to limit itself. Consequently a fundamental 
characteristic of the essent is to telos, which means not aim 


50 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


or purpose but end. Here “end” is not meant in a negative 
sense, as though there were something about it that did not 
continue, that failed or ceased. End is ending in the sense of 
fulfillment ( Vollendung ). Limit and end are that wherewith 
the essent begins to be. It is on this basis that we must under- 
stand the supreme term that Aristotle used for being, ente- 
lecheia—the holding (preserving)-itself-in-the-ending (limit). 
What later philosophy, not to mention biology, made of the 
term “entelechy” (cf. Leibniz) shows the full extent of the 
degeneration from Greek thought. That which places itself 
in its limit, completing it, and so stands, has form, morphé. 
Form as the Greeks understood it derives its essence from an 
emerging placing-itself-in-the-limit. 

But from the viewpoint of the beholder that which stands- 
there-in-itself becomes that which re-presents itself, which 
presents itself in what it looks like. The Greeks call the ap- 
pearance of a thing eidos or idea. Initially eidos included a 
resonance of what we too have in mind when we say: the 
thing has a face, it can let itself be seen, it stands. The thing 
"sits." It rests in the manifestation, i.e. emergence, of its es- 
sence. But all the definitions of being that we shall now list 
are grounded in, and are held together by, that wherein the 
Greeks unquestionably experienced the meaning of being, 
and which they called ousia, or more fully parousia. The usual, 
unthinking translation of this word as "substance" misses its 
meaning completely. For parousia we have in German a cor- 
responding term—An-wesen ( presence ), which also designates 
an estate or homestead, standing in itself or self-enclosed. In 
Aristotle's time ousia was used both in this sense and in the 
sense of the fundamental term of philosophy. Something is 
present to us. It stands steadily by itself and thus manifests 
itself. It is. For the Greeks "being" basically meant this stand- 
ing presence. 

But Greek philosophy never returned to this ground of 
being and to what it implies. It remained on the surface of 
that which is present and sought to examine it in the deter- 
minations we have cited. 

We now have a better understanding of the Greek view of 
being mentioned above in our explanation of the term meta- 
physics, namely the experience of being as physis. As we said, 


GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF “BEING” 51 


the later concepts of “nature” must be set aside: physis means 
the emerging and arising, the spontaneous unfolding that lin- 
gers. In this power rest and motion are opened out of original 
unity. This power is the overpowering presence that is not 
yet mastered (bewältigt) in thought, wherein that which is 
present manifests itself as an essent. But this power first issues 
from concealment, ie. in Greek: alétheia (unconcealment) 
when the power accomplishes itself as a world. 

It is through world that the essent first becomes essent. 

Heraclitus says (Fragment 53): "Conflict is for all (that 
is present) the creator that causes to emerge, but (also) for 
all the dominant preserver. For it makes some to appear as 
gods, others as men; it creates (shows) some as slaves, others 
as freemen.”* 

The polemos named here is a conflict that prevailed prior 
to everything divine and human, not a war in the human sense. 
This conflict, as Heraclitus thought it, first caused the realm 
of being to separate into opposites; it first gave rise to posi- 
tion and order and rank. In such separation cleavages, inter- 
vals, distances, and joints opened. In the conflict (Aus- 
einandersetzung, setting-apart) a world comes into being. 
(Conflict does not split, much less destroy unity. It constitutes 
unity, it is a binding-together, logos. Polemos and logos are 
the same.) 

The struggle meant here is the original struggle, for it gives 
rise to the contenders as such; it is not a mere assault on 
something already there. It is this conflict that first projects 
and develops what had hitherto been unheard of, unsaid and 
unthought. The battle is then sustained by the creators, poets, 
thinkers, statesmen. Against the overwhelming chaos they set 
the barrier of their work, and in their work they capture the 
world thus opened up. It is with these works that the ele- 
mental power, the physis first comes to stand. Only now does 
the essent become essent as such. This world-building is his- 
tory in the authentic sense. Not only does conflict as such 
give rise to ( ent-stehen lassen) the essent; it also preserves 
the essent in its permanence (Stündigkeit). Where struggle 


* «óAegog Távrov èv TTÓp éott, Távrov È Baorrevc, Kat 
ToUs pév Oeoùç *Se1€e tos SÈ &vOpwtrouc, roUc p£v SovAouG ETroinoe 
Tous 8& £AevOÉpouc. 


52 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


ceases, the essent does not vanish, but the world turns away. 
The essent is no longer asserted (i.e. preserved as such). Now 
it is merely found ready-made; it is datum. The end result is 
no longer that which is impressed into limits (ie. placed in 
its form); it is merely finished and as such available to every- 
one, already-there, no longer embodying any world—now man 
does as he pleases with what is available. The essent becomes 
an object, either to be bebeld (view, image) or to be acted 
upon (product and calculation). The original world-making 
power, physis, degenerates into a prototype to be copied and 
imitated. Nature becomes a special field, differentiated from 
art and everything that can be fashioned according to plan. 
The original emergence and standing of energies, the phaines- 
thai, or appearance in the great sense of a world epiphany, 
becomes a visibility of things that are already-there and can 
be pointed out. The eye, the vision, which originally pro- 
jected the project into potency, becomes a mere looking at 
or looking over or gaping at. Vision has degenerated into mere 
optics (Schopenhauers “world eye"—pure cognition . . .). 

True, there are still essents. There are more of them, and 
they make more of a stir than ever. But being has gone out 
of them. The essent has been made into an "object" of end- 
less and variegated busy-ness, and only thereby has it re- 
tained an appearance of its permanence. 


When the creators vanish from the nation, when they are 
barely tolerated as an irrelevant curiosity, an ornament, as 
eccentrics having nothing to do with real life; when authen- 
tic conflict ceases, converted into mere polemics, into the 
machinations and intrigues of man within the realm of the 
given, then the decline has set in. For even if an epoch still 
strives to maintain the inherited level and dignity of its being- 
there, the level falls. It can be maintained only if it is at ell 
times creatively transcended. 

"Being" meant for the Greeks: permanence in a twofold 
sense: 

1. standing-in-itself (In-sich-stehen ) in the sense of aris- 
ing ( Ent-stehen, standing-out-of ) (physis), 

2. but, as such, “permanent” (stündig), ie. enduring 
(ousia). 


GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF “BEING” 53 


Nonbeing means accordingly to depart from such gener- 
ated permanence: existasthai, “existence,” “to exist,” meant 
for the Greeks precisely nonbeing. The thoughtless habit of 
using the words “existence” and “exist” as designations for 
being is one more indication of our estrangement both from 
being and from a radical, forceful, and definite exegesis of 
being. 

Ptosis, enklisis mean to fall, to incline, i.e. to depart and 
deviate from permanent standing. We raise the question: 
why did just these two terms come into use in linguistics? 
The significance of the words ptdsis—enklisis presupposes the 
notion of a standing upright. As we have said, the Greeks 
viewed language as something essent, hence in line with their 
understanding of being. Essent is that which is permanent 
and represents itself as such, that which appears and mani- 
fests itself primarily to vision. In a certain broad sense the 
Greeks looked on language from a visual point of view, that 
is, starting from the written language. It is in writing that 
the spoken language comes to stand. Language is, i.e. it stands 
in the written image of the word, in the written signs, the 
letters, grammata. Consequently grammar represents language 
in being. But through the flow of speech language seeps away 
into the impermanent. Thus, down to our own time, language 
has been interpreted grammatically. But the Greeks also knew 
of the phonetic character of language, the phoné. They es- 
tablished rhetoric and poetics. (But all this did not in itself 
lead to an appropriate definition of the essence of language.) 

The crucial view of language remains the grammatical 
view. Among the words and their forms it finds some that 
are deviations from, modulations of, fundamental forms. The 
fundamental position of the noun (the substantive) is the 
nominative singular: e.g. ho kyklos, the circle. The funda- 
mental position of the verb is the first person singular of the 
present indicative; e.g. lego, I say. The infinitive on the other 
hand is a special mode of the verb, an enklisis. Of what kind? 
This may best be determined by an example. One form of 
lego is lexainto. “They (the men in question) might be said 
to be and called"—traitors for example. On close scrutiny we 
find that this inflectional form discloses a different person 
(the third), another number (not singular but plural), an- 


54 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


other voice (passive instead of active), another tense (aorist 
instead of present), another mood in the restricted sense (not 
indicative but optative). What is named in the word is not 
invoked as really present but represented as only potentially 
in being. 

The inflected form discloses all this as part of its meaning 
and causes it to be immediately understood. To disclose some- 
thing different along with the fundamental meaning, to cause 
it to arise and be seen: therein lies the power of the enklisis, 
in which the erect word leans to one side. It is therefore called 
enklisis paremphatikos. 'The characteristic paremphaino stems 
authentically from the fundamental relation of the Greeks to 
the essent as the standing, the permanent. 

Plato (Timaeus, 5o e) uses the word in an important con- 
text. In this passage he inquires about the becoming of that 
which becomes. To become means “to come to being." Plato 
differentiates three classes: 1) to gignomen, that which be- 
comes; 2) to en hoi gignetai, that wherein it becomes, the me- 
dium in which a thing in process of becoming forms itself 
and out of which, once become, it emerges; 3) to hothen 
aphomoioumenon, that whence that which becomes derives 
the standard of resemblance; for everything in process of be- 
coming, that becomes something, anticipates what it is going 
to become and takes it as a model. 

For clarification of the meaning of paremphaino let us con- 
sider what has been said under 2). That wherein something 
becomes refers to what we call "space." The Greeks had no 
word for "space." This is no accident; for they experienced 
the spatial on the basis not of extension but of place (topos); 
they experienced it as chéra, which signifies neither place nor 
space but that which is occupied by what stands there. The 
place belongs to the thing itself. Each of all the various things 
has its place. That which becomes is placed in this local 
"space" and emerges from it. But in order that this should 
be possible, "space" must be free from all the modes of ap- 
pearance that it might derive from anywhere. For if it were 
similar to any of the modes of appearance that enter into it, 
it would, in receiving forms of antithetical or totally different 
essence, manifest its own appearance and so produce a poor 


GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF “BEING” 55 


realization of the model.* That wherein the things in process 
of becoming are placed must precisely not present an aspect 
and appearance of its own. (The reference to the passage in 
Timaeus is intended not only to clarify the link between the 
paremphainon and the on, between also-appearing and being 
as permanence, but at the same time to suggest that the 
transformation of the barely apprehended essence of place 
(topos) and of chora into a “space” defined by extension was 
initiated by the Platonic philosophy, i.e. in the interpretation 
of being as idea. Might chóra not mean: that which abstracts 
itself from every particular, that which withdraws, and in 
such a way precisely admits and “makes place" for something 
else?) Let us return to the form lexainto. It manifests a 
poikilia of directions of meaning. For this reason it is called 
enklisis paremphatikos, a deviation which is able to manifest 
person, number, tense, voice, mood along with its basic mean- 
ing. This is grounded in the fact that the word as such is a 
word, insofar as it causes to appear (déloun). If to the form 
lexainto we compare the form legein, the infinitive, we find 
here too an inflection, an enklisis over against the basic form 
legó, but one in which person, number, mood are not mani- 
fested. Here the enklisis and its function of manifesting re- 
veal a deficiency. Accordingly, this form is called enklisis 
a-paremphatikos. In Latin the term corresponding to this 
negative term is modus infinitivus. The meaning of the in- 
finitive form is not limited and cut to order in the respects 
we have mentioned, according to person, number, etc. The 
Latin translation of a-paremphatikos by in-finitivus deserves 
our attention. The original Greek with its reference to the 
appearance and coming-to-appear of what stands erect or 
inclines has vanished. Now the determining factor is the 
formal concept of limitation. 

But of course the infinitive occurs, and particularly in 
Greek, in the passive and middle voice, and in the present, 
perfect, and future; it manifests at least voice and tense. This 
has raised various controversies about the infinitive, which 


* Timaeus 50 e: &popoov öv £keívoy é&racóvy tv ibeGv cac 
p£XAot 8ÉyeoOaí moðev. ópotov yap Sv tav éreicióvroy mwi TH THS 
évavtiac tÁ TE Tfj mapámav GAANS oUcEwS mórt’ EABOI Bexópevov 
Kak@>o &v popoio? Thy avto mapeupaîvov Syiv. 


56 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


we shall not take up here. But there is one point that should 
be clarified for our purposes. The infinitive form legein, to 
say, can be understood in such a way that we no longer think 
of voice and tense but only of what the verb as such intends 
and manifests. In this respect the original Greek term is par- 
ticularly apt. According to the Latin term the infinitive is 
a form that may be said to cut off the meaning from all defi- 
nite relations. The meaning is drawn out (ab-stracted) from 
all the particular relationships. In this abstraction the infini- 
tive yields only what is represented by the word as such. 
Hence present-day grammarians say that the infinitive is the 
"abstract verbal concept." It comprehends and formulates the 
meaning only in a general sense. It designates only this gen- 
eral meaning. In our language the infinitive is the form by 
which one refers to a verb. And there is a lack, a deficiency 
in the form and mode of meaning of the infinitive. The in- 
finitive no longer manifests what the verb otherwise reveals. 

And indeed the infinitive is a late, in fact the latest, form 
in the order of linguistic development. This may be demon- 
strated by the example of the infinitive of the Greek word 
whose questionable character led to our discussion. "Being" 
(ie. to be) is in Greek einai. We know that a literary lan- 
guage develops from dialects with their original local and 
historical roots. The language of Homer is a mixture of dif- 
ferent dialects which preserve the earlier form of the lan- 
guage. It is in the formation of the infinitive that the Greek 
dialects are most divergent, and for this reason linguists have 
come to use divergent infinitives as the chief criterion "by 
which to differentiate and group the dialects." (See Wacker- 
nagel, Vorlesungen über Syntax, 1, 257 £.) 

To be is in Attic einai, in Arcadien énai, in Lesbian em- 
menai, in Doric emen. In Latin it is esse, in Oscan ezum, in 
Umbrian erom. In both languages the modi finiti were already 
stabilized and uniform at a time when the enklisis aparem- 
phatikos still preserved its dialectical peculiarities and fluc- 
tuations. We consider this circumstance as an indication that 
the infinitive carries a privileged significance in language as 
a whole. The question remains whether the power of the in- 
finitive forms to endure stems from the fact that the infinitive 
is an abstract and late verb form or from the fact that it 


GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF "BEING" 57 


names something which underlies all the inflections of the 
verb. On the other hand, there is justification in the warning 
that we should be on our guard against the infinitive form, 
since from a grammatical point of view it is the form that 
communicates the least of the verb's meaning. 

But we have not yet fully elucidated the word form under 
discussion, namely the form in which we customarily speak 
of “being.” We say “das Sein.” This form arises when by 
prefacing it with an article we transform the abstract infinitive 
into a substantive: to einai. The article was originally a de- 
monstrative pronoun. It signifies that the object indicated 
stands as it were for itself, and is. This function of demon- 
stration and indication always plays an eminent role in lan- 
guage. If we say only “sein,” what is named is already in- 
definite enough. But the transformation of the infinitive into 
a verbal substantive further stabilizes as it were the emptiness 
that already resided in the infinitive; “sein” is set down like 
a stable object. The substantive “Sein” (being) implies that 
what has thus been named itself “is.” Now “being” itself 
becomes something that “is,” though manifestly only essents 
are and not being in addition. But if being itself were some- 
thing essent in an essent, then we should have to find it, 
particularly as the essentness (das Seiendsein) of an essent 
confronts us even when we do not definitely apprehend its 
particular properties. 

Can it now surprise us that “being” should be so empty 
a word when the very word form is based on an emptying 
and an apparent stabilization of emptiness? Let this word 
“being” be a warning to us. Let us not be lured into the empti- 
est of all forms, the verbal substantive. And let us not get 
caught in the abstraction of the infinitive "sein." If we wish 
to penetrate to “being” from language, let us stick to the forms 
I am, thou art, he, she, it is, we are, etc., I was, we were, they 
have been, etc. But this does not make our understanding of 
what "being" means in this connection, and wherein its es- 
sence consists, one bit plainer! On the contrary! Let us make 
the experiment. 

We say “I am.” Each man can assert the being here in- 
tended only for himself: my being. Wherein does it consist, 
and where does it reside? Seemingly this is what should be 


58 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


easiest for us to bring to light, for to no essent are we so close 
as to what we ourselves are. Everything else "is" no less even 
if we ourselves are not. Apparently we cannot be so close 
to any other essent as to the essent that we ourselves are. Ac- 
tually we cannot even say that we are close to the essent that 
we ourselves are, since we itself are it. And yet the truth is 
that everyone is remotest from himself, as remote as the I 
from the you in “you are." 

But today it is the we that counts. Now is the "time of the 
we,” not of the I. We are. What being are we naming in this 
sentence? We say also: the windows are, the stones are. We 
—are. Does this statement mean that a plurality of Ts is 
present? And what about the “I was” and “we were,” what 
about being in the past? Has it gone away from us? Or are 
we exactly what we were? Are we not becoming just exactly 
what we are? 

Scrutiny of the definite verbal forms of “to be” brings 
the opposite of a clarification of being. Moreover, it leads to 
a new difficulty. Let us compare the infinitive “to say” and 
the base form “I say” with the infinitive “to be” and the base 
form “I am." “Be” and “am” ( “sein” and “bin” ) prove to be 
different words in respect to their root. Different from both 
in turn are the “was” and “been” ( “war” and "gewesen" ) of 
the past forms. This brings us to the question of the different 
roots of the word “being.” 


2. The Etymology of the Word “Being” 


First of all we must briefly report what is known to the 
science of linguistics about the roots that occur in the in- 
flections of the verb “sein.” Present knowledge of the sub- 
ject is by no means definitive; not so much because new 
facts may come to light, as because it is to be expected that 
those already known will be examined with new eyes and a 
more authentic questioning. The entire range of the inflec- 
tions of the verb “sein” is determined by three different stems. 

The first two stems to be named are Indo-European and 
also occur in the Greek and Latin words for “being.” 

1. The oldest, the actual radical word is es, Sanskrit asus, 


GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF “BEING” 59 


life, the living, that which from out of itself stands and which 
moves and rests in itself: the self-standing ( Eigenstindig ) 
To this radical belong in Sanskrit the verbal formations esmi, 
esi, esti, asmi, to which correspond the Greek eimi and einai, 
the Latin esum and esse. Sunt, sind, and sein belong together. 
It is noteworthy that the ^ist" has maintained itself in all 
Germanic languages from the very start (estin, est. . .). 

2. The other Indo-European radical is bhu, bheu. To it 
belong the Greek phud, to emerge, to be powerful, of itself 
to come to stand and remain standing. Up until now this 
bhu has been interpreted according to the usual superficial 
view of physis and phyein as nature and "to grow." A more 
fundamental exegesis, stemming from preoccupation with the 
beginning of Greek philosophy, shows the “growing” to be an 
"emerging," which in turn is defined by presence and ap- 
pearance. Recently the root phy- has been connected with 
pha-phainesthai. Physis would then be that which emerges 
into the light, phyein would mean to shine, to give light and 
therefore to appear. (See Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprach- 
forschung, Vol. 59.) 

From this stem come the Latin perfect fui, fuo; similarly 
our German “bin,” “bist,” wir “birn,” ihr “birt” (which died 
out in the fourteenth century). The imperative “bis” (“bis 
mein Weib, be my wife”) survived longer. 

3. The third stem occurs only in the inflection of the Ger- 
manic verb “sein”: wes; Sanskrit: vasami; Germanic: wesan, to 
dwell, to sojourn; to ves belong: pestia, pasti, Vesta, vestibu- 
lum. The German forms resulting from this stem are “ge- 
wesen,” was, war, es west, wesen. The participle ^wesend" 
is still preserved in an-wesend (present ) and ab-wesend ( ab- 
sent). The substantive “Wesen” did not originally mean 
*whatness," quiddity, but enduring as presence, presence and 
absence. The sens in the Latin prae-sens and ab-sens has been 
lost. Does Dii consentes mean the gods who are present to- 
gether? 

From the three stems we derive the three initial concrete 
meanings: to live, to emerge, to linger or endure. These are 
established by linguistics, which also establishes that these 
initial meanings are extinct today, that only an "abstract" 
meaning "to be" has been preserved. But here a crucial ques- 


60 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


tion arises: how and wherein do the three stems accord? 
What sustains and guides the saga (Sage) of being? What 
is the content of our use of the word “being”—after all its lin- 
guistic modulations? Are our use of the word and our under- 
standing of being the same or are they not? How does the 
distinction between being and the essent dwell in the enun- 
ciation (Sage) of being? Valuable as the findings of linguis- 
tics are, they do not provide an answer. For it is only after 
these facts are established that the questioning can begin. 

We must ask a whole series of questions: 

1. What sort of "abstraction" was at work in the formation 
of the word "sein"? 

2. May we, in the first place, speak of abstraction in this 
connection? 

3. What then is the abstract meaning that remains? 

4. Can we explain the process that here opens up to us, 
the process by which different meanings, hence experiences, 
grow together to form the inflections of one verb, and not 
just any verb but a very particular one, simply by saying that 
something has been lost? Nothing arises through mere loss, 
and least of all something which in the unity of its meaning 
unites and merges elements that were originally different. 

5. What fundamental meaning can have guided the mix- 
ture that has here taken place? 

6. What orientation of meaning carries through, unblurred 
by this mixture? 

7. Ordinarily the history of the word "sein" is considered 
on a level with that of other words whose etymology is being 
investigated. But should we not except it from this equiva- 
lence, particularly if we bear in mind that even the root 
meanings (live, emerge, dwell) invoke something more than 
indifferent particulars in the sphere of the sayable, and by 
naming it first disclose it? 

8. Can the meaning of being, which on the basis of a 
purely logical, grammatical interpretation strikes us as “ab- 
stract” and hence derived, be inherently whole and funda- 
mental? 

9. Can this be shown through language if we take a suffi- 
ciently basic view of it? 


GRAMMAR AND ETYMOLOGY OF “BEING” 61 


As the fundamental question of metaphysics we ask “Why 
are there essents rather than nothing?” This fundamental 
question, if we go deeply enough into its origins, implies the 
preliminary question “How does it stand with being?” 

What do we mean by the words “to be,” “being”? In at- 
tempting to answer, we immediately run into difficulties. We 
reach into the intangible. Yet we are unremittingly affected 
by the essent, we live in a continuous relation to the essent, 
and we know of ourselves “as essents.” 

"Being" remains barely a sound to us, a threadbare appel- 
lation. If nothing more is left to us, we must seek at least to 
grasp this last vestige of a possession. Therefore we ask “How 
does it stand with the word ‘being’ ( das Sein )?" 

We have answered this question in two ways which have 
led us into the grammar and the etymology of the word. Let 
us sum up the results of this twofold discussion of the word 
“das Sein.” 

1. Grammatical investigation of the word form shows that 
in the infinitive the definite meanings of the word no longer 
make themselves felt; they are effaced. Substantivization com- 
pletely stabilizes and objectifies this effacement. The word 
becomes a name for something indeterminate. 

2. Etymological investigation of the word’s meaning has 
shown that in respect to meaning what we have long called 
by the name of “das Sein” is a compromise and mixture of 
three different radical meanings. None of these reaches up 
independently to determine the meaning of the word. Mix- 
ture and effacement go hand in hand. In the combination of 
these two processes we find an adequate explanation of the 
fact from which we started, that the word “being” is empty 
and its meaning a vapor. 


d f » PTT n EE 1 1 
Pas E Jue ae cy meus - La ner 
J ET eds 345 ue nie . 


^1 rie $4 Qua t 
PE aca Mapa i v qp 


4 - 
Qiu eun Sine 


i 


indo T ETATE MED. «pe AE d fi esa 
Sen 2 i i d a | oe 
dote E ab x wasn "o 4 EX gach d 


» 4 Do a G » ean er iy ray cm To. 

Walt" 3 Sse HothelT (ime. jo t E - oy uad hay 
` dE Rg b: “grind brags eels d ite hag 

ny 4 i g LI ves dd ni ih | 7i err Yù ‘ate 


ip Peer Sir} LES Vo liis edi ius mamy wd 
bn y NE 2 Ai Senet: ci MSN HI uM da 
4. '^ wozu po) Cas tus Qr Md 
teZY & role admi 2 ner «ME t fy earar gm en 
art arbem ely Aegina. A ee ee Hd 
"wn: otra: ede re ean cle id ale egi 
aa ibi" inam welt "editor bis "eter ry 
—— k EU gadt Da 
aan ig psa! aat Set iada Saige ue 
Sail MSi loil ye m" Teu biis cnt d eto fs u- 7 
d- icis & oe DT a0. * a? inh ES ANTAN . 
LLL LER a adhe 

~ pif -— Fund aram “als murice. ly civ 'acaleee 


c6 cms Tati dl 2, iet al p ngaen d 
(s tapis t atur Ofe x. ft m gen. 


qu p nds Jp "i Ju et anais * 4 daldve ao 
dx. 3 E Ld 3 LN MO 


y * " " 1 à $ > 


m i Li 


- mcum wakis Tn 


< 
li L| = A " . MAD | 54 tt 
r ha : TET rutas Seite 
TE Tet’ A TT hy wang 


n" post i cyl: Vedas Né 


D] 
é r A , E 


3. 


THE QUESTION OF 
THE ESSENCE OF BEING 


We have undertaken a study of the word “being” in or- 
der to penetrate the fact under discussion and so to assign it 
its proper place. We do not mean to accept this fact blindly, 
as we accept the fact that there are dogs and cats. We in- 
tend to form an opinion of the fact itself. And this we intend 
to do even at the risk that this intention may give an impres- 
sion of stubbornness, and be set down as a forlorn unworldli- 
ness which takes the irrelevant and unreal for reality and 
entangles itself in the dissection of mere words. We wish to 
illuminate the fact. The result of our efforts is the observa- 
tion that in the process of its development language forms 
"infinitives," e.g. "sein," and that in the course of time lan- 
guage has produced a blunted, indefinite meaning of this 
word. This happens to be so. Instead of gaining an elucida- 
tion of the fact, we have merely set another fact, pertaining 
to the history of language, beside it or behind it. 

If we now start again with these facts of the history of lan- 
guage and ask why they are as they are, what we perhaps 
may still cite as a ground of explanation becomes not clearer 
but more obscure. Then the fact that things stand as they 
do with the word "being" really congeals into its inexorable 
facticity. But this happened long ago. Those who follow the 
usual method in philosophy are indeed invoking this fact when 
they say at the very outset: the word “being” has the emptiest 
and therefore most comprehensive meaning. What is thought 
in connection with this word is consequently the supreme 


64 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


generic concept, the genus. One can still barely detect the 
"ens in genere" as the old ontology puts it, but just as cer- 
tainly there is nothing further to be sought in that direction. 
To attach the crucial question of metaphysics to this empty 
word “being” is to bring everything into confusion. Here there 
is only the one possibility, to recognize the emptiness of the 
word and let it go at that. This we may now apparently do 
with a clear conscience; and all the more so since the fact is 
explained historically by the history of language. 

Let us then get away from the empty schema of this word 
“being.” But where to? The answer cannot be difficult. At 
most we may wonder why we have dwelt so long, and in such 
detail, on the word “being.” Away from the empty, universal 
word "being"; let us concern ourselves with the particulars 
of the different realms of the essent itself. For this undertak- 
ing we have all sorts of things at our disposal. The imme- 
diately tangible things, all the things that are constantly at 
hand, tools, vehicles, etc. If these particular essents strike us 
as too commonplace, not refined and soulful enough for “meta- 
physics,” we can restrict ourselves to the nature around us, 
the land, the sea, the mountains, rivers, woods, and to the 
particulars therein, the trees, birds, insects, grasses, and stones. 
If we are looking for a large, impressive essent, the earth is 
close at hand. Essent in the same way as the nearest moun- 
taintop is the moon that is rising back there, or a planet. Es- 
sent is the swarming crowd of people in a busy street. Essent 
are we ourselves, Essent are the Japanese. Essent are Bach’s 
fugues. Essent is the Strassburg cathedral. Essent are Hólder- 
lin’s hymns. Essent are criminals. Essent are the lunatics in 
the lunatic asylum. 

Everywhere essents to our heart’s content. But how do we 
know that each one of all these things that we cite and list 
with so much assurance is an essent? The question sounds 
absurd, for any normal individual can establish infallibly 
that this essent is. Yes, to be sure. [Nor is it even necessary 
for us to use such words, alien to our everyday speech, as 
“essents” and the “essent.”] And actually it does not enter our 
heads at this moment to doubt that all these essents really are, 
basing our doubts on the supposedly scientific observation 
that what we experience is only our sensations and that we 


THE QUESTION OF THE ESSENCE OF BEING 65 


can never escape our body, to which all the things we have 
named remain related. As a matter of fact we should like to 
remark in advance that such considerations, with which peo- 
ple so easily give themselves critical and superior airs, are 
thoroughly uncritical. 

Meanwhile we shall simply let the essent be, as it surrounds 
us and assails us, as it inspires us or dejects us, in our every- 
day lives as well as in great hours and moments. We shall let 
all the essent be, just as it is. But if we thus hold to the 
course of our historical being-there, without soul searching 
and as though taking it for granted; if in every case we let 
the essent be the essent that it is, then we must know what 
"is" and “being” mean. 

But how are we to determine whether an essent, presumed 
to be at some place and time, is or is not, if we cannot clearly 
differentiate in advance between being and nonbeing? How 
are we to make this crucial distinction unless we definitely 
know the meaning of what we are differentiating: namely 
nonbeing and being. How can each and every essent be an 
essent for us unless we understand “being” and “nonbeing” 
beforehand? 

But essents are always confronting us. We differentiate 
between their being-so and being-otherwise, we make judg- 
ments regarding being and nonbeing. Accordingly we know 
clearly what "being" means. Then it is a superficial figure 
of speech and an error to say that this word is empty and 
indeterminate. 

Such considerations bring us into an extremely contradic- 
tory situation. At the start we established that the word “be- 
ing" tells us nothing definite. We did not make up our minds 
to this in advance; no, we found out, and we still find, that 
“being” has a vague and indeterminate meaning. Yet on the 
other hand the investigation we have just carried through 
convinces us that we clearly and surely distinguish "being" 
from nonbeing. 

If we are to orient ourselves in this situation, we must bear 
in mind the following: It may indeed be doubtful whether a 
particular essent, somewhere or at some time, is or is not. 
We can make a mistake, for example as to whether that win- 
dow there, which is after all an essent, is or is not closed. But 


66 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


even in order that the doubt may arise, the definite distinction 
between being and nonbeing must be present in our minds. 
In this case we do not doubt that being is different from 
nonbeing. 

Thus the word “being” is indefinite in meaning and yet we 
understand it definitely. "Being" proves to be totally inde- 
terminate and at the same time highly determinate. From the 
standpoint of the usual logic we have here an obvious con- 
tradiction. Something that contradicts itself cannot be. There 
is no such thing as a square circle. And yet we have this con- 
tradiction: determinate, wholly indeterminate being. If we 
decline to delude ourselves, and if we have a moment’s time 
to spare amid all the activities and diversions of the day, we 
find ourselves standing in the very middle of this contradic- 
tion. And this "stand" of ours is more real than just about any- 
thing else that we call real; it is more real than dogs and cats, 
automobiles and newspapers. 

Suddenly the fact that being is an empty word for us takes 
on an entirely different face. We begin to suspect that the 
word may not be as empty as alleged. If we reflect more 
closely on the word, it ultimately turns out that despite all 
the blur and mixture and universality of its meaning we mean 
something definite by it. This definiteness is so definite and 
unique in its kind that we must even say this: 

The being which belongs to every essent whatsoever, and 
which is thus dispersed among all that is most current and 
familiar, is more unique than all else. 

Everything else, each and every essent, even if it is unique, 
can be compared with other things. Its determinability is in- 
creased by these possibilities of comparison. By virtue of them 
it is in many respects indeterminate. Being, however, can be 
compared with nothing else. Over against being, the only 
other is nothing. And here there is no comparison. If being 
thus represents what is most unique and determinate, the 
word “being” cannot be empty. And in truth it never is empty. 
We may easily convince ourselves of this by a comparison. 
When we perceive the word “being,” either hearing it as a 
phonetic unit or seeing it as a written sign, it immediately 
gives itself as something other than the succession of sounds 
and letters "abracadabra." This too is a succession of sounds, 


THE QUESTION OF THE ESSENCE OF BEING 67 


but we say at once that it is meaningless, though it may have 
its meaning as a magic formula. But "being" is not meaning- 
less in this way. Similarly “being,” written and seen, is at 
once different from “kzomil.” This too is a sequence of letters 
but in connection with this sequence we cannot think any- 
thing. There is no such thing as an empty word; at most a 
word is worn out, though still filled with meaning. The name 
“being” retains its appellative force. “Away from this empty 
word ‘being’; go to the particular essents," proves to be not 
only a hasty but also a highly questionable counsel. Let us 
once more think the whole matter through with the help of 
an example which, to be sure, like every example that we cite 
in dealing with this question, can never clarify the whole mat- 
ter in its full scope and therefore must be taken with certain 
reservations. 

By way of an example, we substitute for the universal con- 
cept “being” the universal concept “tree.” If we wish now to 
say and define what the essence of tree is, we turn away from 
the universal concept to the particular species of tree and the 
particular specimens of these species. This method is so self- 
evident that we almost hesitate to mention it. Yet the matter 
is not as simple as all that. How are we going to find our fa- 
mous particulars, the individual trees as such, as trees; how 
shall we be able even to look for trees, unless the representa- 
tion of what a tree in general is shines before us? If this uni- 
versal representation “tree” were so utterly indeterminate and 
blurred as to give us no certain indication for seeking and find- 
ing, we might perfectly well turn up automobiles or rabbits 
as our determinate particulars, as examples for tree. Even 
though it may be true that in order to determine the essence 
“tree” in every respect, we must pass through the particular, 
it remains at least equally true that the elucidation of essence 
and richness of essence is contingent on the radicalness with 
which we represent and know the universal essence “tree,” 
which in this case means the essence “plant,” which in turn 
means the essence “living things” and “life.” Unless we are 
guided by a developed knowledge of tree-ness, which is mani- 
festly determined from out of itself and its essential ground, 
we can look over thousands and thousands of trees in vain—we 
shall not see the tree for the trees. 


68 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


Now, precisely in regard to "being," one might reply that 
since it is the most universal of concepts our representation 
cannot rise from it to anything higher. In dealing with this su- 
preme and most universal concept reference to what is sub- 
sumed "under" it not only is advisable but is the only hope of 
overcoming its emptiness. 

Striking as this argument may seem, it is false. Here let 
us give two reasons: 

i. It is in general open to question whether the univer- 
sality of being is a universality of genus. Aristotle already sus- 
pected this. Consequently it remains questionable whether an 
individual being can ever be regarded as an example of be- 
ing, in the same way that oak is an example of “tree as such.” 
It is doubtful whether the modes of being (being as nature, 
being as history) represent “species” in the “genus” being. 

2. The word "being" is indeed a universal name and seem- 
ingly a word among others. But this appearance is deceptive. 
The name and what it names are unique. For this reason any 
illustration by examples is a distortion: in this case every ex- 
ample proves not too much but too little. We have pointed 
out above that we must know in advance what “tree” means 
in order to be able to seek and find the particulars: the tree 
species and the individual trees. This is still truer of being. 
Supreme and incomparable is the necessity that we under- 
stand the word "being" beforehand. Hence it does not follow 
from the “universality” of “being” in relation to all essents 
that we must hasten to turn away from it, toward the particu- 
lar; no, what follows is just the opposite, that we should per- 
severe with being and raise the uniqueness of this name and 
what it names to the level of knowledge. 

Over against the fact that the meaning of the word “being” 
remains an indeterminate vapor for us, the fact that we un- 
derstand being and differentiate it with certainty from non- 
being is not just another, second fact; rather, the two belong 
together, they are one. Meanwhile this one has altogether lost 
the character of a fact for us. We do not find it also given 
among many other facts. Instead we begin to suspect that 
some process is at work in what we have hitherto regarded as 
a mere fact. And the nature of this process excepts it from 
other “occurrences.” 


THE QUESTION OF THE ESSENCE OF BEING 69 


But before we resume our endeavor to find out what process 
is at work in this fact, let us make one last attempt to take 
it as something familiar and indifferent. Let us assume that 
this fact does not exist. Let us suppose that this indeterminate 
meaning of being does not exist and that we also do not un- 
derstand what this meaning means. What then? Would there 
merely be a noun and a verb less in our language? No. There 
would be no language at all. No essent as such would disclose 
itself in words, it would no longer be possible to invoke it 
and speak about it in words. For to speak of an essent as such 
includes: to understand it in advance as an essent, that is, to 
understand its being. Assuming that we did not understand 
being at all, assuming that the word "being" did not even 
have its vaporous meaning, there would not be a single word. 
We ourselves could never be speakers. Altogether we could 
not be as we are. For to be a man is to speak. Man says yes 
and no only because in his profound essence he is a speaker, 
the speaker. That is his distinction and at the same time his 
burden. It distinguishes him from stones, plants, animals, but 
also from the gods. Even if we had a thousand eyes and a thou- 
sand ears, a thousand hands and many other senses and or- 
gans, if our essence did not include the power of language, 
all essents would be closed to us, the essent that we ourselves 
are no less than the essent that we are not. 

A review of our discussion up to this point discloses the 
following situation: by setting down as a fact this (hitherto 
nameless) assumption, i.e. that being is for us an empty 
word of vaporous meaning, we depreciated it and deprived 
it of its proper rank. For our being-there, indeed, our under- 
standing of being, even though indefinite, has the highest rank, 
since therein is revealed a power in which the essential pos- 
sibility of our being-there is grounded. This is not a fact 
among other facts but something to which the highest rank 
should be accorded, provided that our being-there, which is 
always a historical being-there, does not remain indifferent to 
us. Yet even in order that our being-there should remain for 
‘us an indifferent essent, we should have to understand being. 
Without this understanding we should not even be able to 
say no to our being-there. 

It is only by appreciating this pre-eminence of the under- 


70 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


standing of being that we preserve it in its rank. In what way 
can we appreciate this rank, maintain it in its dignity? This 
we cannot decide arbitrarily. 

Because the understanding of being resides first and fore- 
most in a vague, indefinite meaning, and yet remains certain 
and definite; because, accordingly, the understanding of be- 
ing, with all its rank, remains obscure, confused, and hidden, 
it must be elucidated, disentangled, and torn from its con- 
cealment. This can be done only if we inquire about this un- 
derstanding of being which we at first accepted as a mere 
fact—if we put it in question. 

Questioning is the authentic and proper and only way of 
appreciating what by its supreme rank holds our existence 
in its power. Hence no question is more worthy of being asked 
than that of our understanding of being, unless it be that of 
being itself. The more authentic our questioning, the more 
immediately and steadfastly we dwell on the most question- 
able of all questions, namely the circumstance that we under- 
stand being quite indefinitely and yet with supreme defi- 
niteness. 

We understand the word “being” and with it all its inflec- 
tions, even though it looks as though this understanding re- 
mained indefinite. Regarding what we understand, regarding 
what in some way opens itself to us in understanding, we say: 
it has a meaning. Insofar as it is in any way understood, being 
has a meaning. To experience and understand being as the 
most worthy of problems, to inquire specially after being, 
means then nothing other than to ask after the meaning of 
being. 

In Sein und Zeit the question of the meaning of being is 
raised and developed as a question for the first time in the 
history of philosophy. It is also stated and explained in detail 
what is meant by meaning (namely the disclosure of being, 
not only of the essent as such; see Sein und Zeit, $8 32, 44, 
65). 

Why may we no longer call what we have just mentioned 
a fact? Why was this term misleading from the very start? 
Because this circumstance that we understand being does not 
just occur among other circumstances in our lives, as, for ex- 
ample, the circumstance that we possess ear lobes of such and 


THE QUESTION OF THE ESSENCE OF BEING 71 


such form. Instead of these ear lobes, some other structure 
might serve as part of our hearing organ. That we understand 
being is not only real; it is also necessary. Without such a dis- 
closure of being we could not be “the human race.” To be 
sure, it is not absolutely necessary that we should be. There 
is the pure possibility that man might not be at all. After all 
there was a time when man was not. But strictly speaking we 
cannot say: There was a time when man was not. At all times 
man was and is and will be, because time produces itself only 
insofar as man is. There is no time when man was not, not be- 
cause man was from all eternity and will be for all eternity but 
because time is not eternity and time fashions itself into a time 
only as a human, historical being-there. But a necessary condi- 
tion for his being-there is that he understand being. Insofar as 
this is necessary, man is historically real. Therefore we under- 
stand being and not only, as it may appear at first sight, in the 
manner of the vague meaning of the word. No, the determi- 
nateness with which we understand the indeterminate meaning 
can be unambiguously delimited, and not after the fact, but 
as a determinateness which, unbeknownst to us, governs us 
from out of our very foundations. In order to show this, we 
start again from the word “being.” But here it should be re- 
called that, in line with the basic metaphysical question set 
forth in the beginning, we take the word in the widest sense: 
it finds its limit only at nothing. Everything that is not simply 
nothing is, and for us even nothing “belongs” to “being.” 

In the present discussion we have taken a decisive step. 
In a lecture everything depends on such steps. Occasional 
questions that have been submitted to me about this lecture 
have shown me over and over again that most people listen 
in the wrong direction and become entangled in details. True, 
even in lectures on the special sciences, it is the context that 
counts. But for the sciences the context is determined directly 
by the object, which for the sciences is always in some way 
present. For philosophy on the other hand, the object is not 
present; what is more, philosophy has no object to begin with. 
It is a process which must at all times achieve being (in its 
appropriate manifestness) anew. Only in this process can phil- 
osophical truth disclose itself. For this reason it is crucial that 


72 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


the listener should take the different steps in the process after 
and with the lecturer. 

What step have we taken? What step must we take over 
and over again? 

First we considered the following proposition as a fact: 
The word “being” has a vague meaning; it is almost an empty 
word. Closer discussion of this fact revealed: the vagueness of 
this meaning finds its explanation: 1) in the blurring charac- 
teristic of the infinitive, 2) in the mixture into which all three 
of the original stem meanings entered. 

We designated the fact thus explained as the unshaken 
point of departure of all the traditional metaphysical ques- 
tioning about “being.” It starts from the essent and is oriented 
toward it. It does not start from being and does not enter into 
the questionable nature of its manifestness. Because the mean- 
ing and concept of “being” have supreme universality, meta- 
physies as "physics" cannot go higher to define them more 
closely. It has only one way left, from the universal to the 
particular essent. In this way, it is true, it fills in the emptiness 
of the concept of being, namely with the essents. Yet the ad- 
monition “Away from being; go to the particular essents,” 
shows that metaphysics is mocking itself without knowing it. 

For the much-vaunted particular essent can only disclose 
itself as such insofar as we already understand being in its 
essence. 

Some light has been thrown on this essence. But it has not 
yet been drawn into the area of questioning. 

Now let us recall the question we asked in the beginning: Is 
"being" only an empty word? Or are being and the asking of 
the question of being the crux of the spiritual history of the 
West? 

Is being merely the last cloudy streak of evaporating reality; 
is the only possible attitude for us to let it evaporate into com- 
plete indifference? Or is being the worthiest of all questions? 

Thus inquiring, we take the decisive step from an indiffer- 
ent fact, from the supposed meaninglessness of the word “be- 
ing," to the supremely problematic phenomenon that being 
necessarily discloses itself in our understanding. 

The seemingly unshakable bald fact so blindly trusted by 
metaphysics has been shaken. 


THE QUESTION OF THE ESSENCE OF BEING 73 


Thus far in our inquiry about being we have striven pri- 
marily to grasp the word according to its form and meaning. 
Now it becomes clear that the question of being is not a matter 
of grammar and etymology. If in spite of this we again take 
language as our starting point, a special status must, here and 
in general, be accorded to the relation between being and 
language. 

Ordinarily language, the word, is regarded as an expression 
of experience, which follows in the wake of experience. Insofar 
as things and occurrences are experienced in these experiences, 
language is indeed an expression, a copy as it were, of the ex- 
perienced essent. The word “watch” for example, permits the 
well-known threefold differentiation; it may be considered: 
1) in respect to the audible and visible form of the word; 2) 
in respect to the meaning of what we represent in connection 
with it; 3) in respect to the thing: a watch, this particular 
watch. Here 1) is a sign for 2) and 2) is an indication of 3). 

Thus presumably we may do the same with the word “be- 
ing," that is, differentiate word form, word meaning, and 
thing. And we easily see that as long as we dwell on the word 
form and its meaning we have not yet come to the "thing," to 
the point as it were of our question about being. If we expect 
to apprehend the essence of the thing, here of being, by mere 
discussions of the word and its meaning, we shall obviously 
be making a mistake. We are hardly likely to fall into such an 
error, for it would be like trying to investigate the phenomena 
of motion in the ether, in matter, to determine the atomic 
processes, by grammatical studies of the words "atom" and 
"ether" rather than by the necessary physical experiments. 

Thus, regardless of whether the word “being” has an in- 
definite or a definite meaning, or, as we have seen, both at 
once, we must, beyond the factor of signification, come to the 
thing itself. But is "being" a thing like watches, houses, or 
any essent whatsoever? We have already run into the trouble- 
some circumstance that being is not an essent and not an es- 
sent component of the essent. The being of the building over 
there is not just another thing of the same kind as the roof 
or the cellar. No thing corresponds to the word and the mean- 
ing "being." 

But from this we cannot infer that being consists only of 


74 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


the word and its meaning. The meaning of the word does not, 
as a meaning, constitute the essence of being. If it did, this 
would mean that the being of the essent, of our building for 
example, consisted in a word meaning. It would obviously 
be absurd to suppose any such thing. No; in the word "being," 
in its meaning, we pass through word and meaning and aim 
at being itself, except that it is not a thing, if by thing we 
mean something that is in any way essent. 

From this it follows that in respect to the word “being” and 
its inflections, and all the words lying within its sphere, word 
and meaning are more profoundly dependent on what is 
meant than in the case of other words. But the converse is 
also true. Being itself is dependent on the word in a totally 
different and more fundamental sense than any essent. 

In each of its inflections the word “being” bears an essen- 
tially different relation to being itself from that of all other 
nouns and verbs of the language to the essent that is expressed 
in them. 

From this it may be inferred that the foregoing considera- 
tions regarding the word "being" are of greater import than 
other remarks about words and linguistic usage in connection 
with things of any sort whatsoever. But even though we have 
here a very special and fundamental connection between word, 
meaning, and being, in which so to speak the thing is missing, 
we must not suppose that it will be possible to sift out the es- 
sence of being itself from a characterization of the word 
meaning. 

After regarding the peculiar phenomenon that the question 
of being remains intimately bound up with the question of 
the word, we resume the course of our questioning. We must 
show that our understanding of being has a determinateness 
of its own, ordained by being itself. Now when we start from 
discourse about being, because in a certain sense we are al- 
ways and essentially compelled to take this as our starting 
point, we shall try to bear in mind the being itself of which 
the discourse speaks. We select a simple and familiar and 
almost careless kind of discourse where being is uttered in a 
word form whose use is so frequent that we scarcely notice it. 

We say: "God is." "The earth is." "The lecture is in the 
auditorium." “This man is from Swabia.” “The cup is of silver." 


THE QUESTION OF THE ESSENCE OF BEING 75 


"The peasant is to the fields." “The book is mine.” “Red is the 
port side." "There is famine in Russia." ^The enemy is in re- 
treat." “The plant louse is in the vineyard.” “The dog is in the 
garden." “Uber allen Gipfeln/ ist Ruh."* 

In each case the "is" is meant differently. Of this we may 
easily convince ourselves, particularly if we take this utter- 
ance of the “is” as it really occurs, i.e. spoken in each case 
out of a definite situation, purpose, and mood, and not as a 
mere sentence or stale example in a grammar. 

“God is"; i.e. he is really present. “The earth is"; ie. we 
experience and believe it to be permanently there; "the lec- 
ture is in the auditorium"; i.e. it takes place. "The man is from 
Swabia"; i.e. he comes from there. "The cup is of silver"; i.e. 
it is made of . . . "The peasant is to the fields"; he has gone 
to the fields and is staging there. "The book is mine"; i.e. it 
belongs to me. “Red is the port side"; i.e. it stands for port. 
"The dog is in the garden"; i.e. he is running around in the 
garden. “Over all the summits/ is rest”; that is to say??? Does 
the "is" in these lines mean is situated, is present, takes places, 
abides? None of these will fit. And yet it is the same simple 
"is." Or does the verse mean: Over all the summits peace 
prevails, as quiet prevails in a classroom? No, that won't do 
either. Or perhaps: Over all the summits lies rest—or holds 
sway? That seems better, but it also misses the mark. 

"Über allen Gipfeln/ ist Ruh"; the "ist" cannot be para- 
phrased and yet it is only this "ist," tossed off in those few 
lines that Goethe wrote in pencil on the window frame of a 
mountain hut near Ilmenau (cf. his letter to Zelter of Sep- 
tember 4, 1831). Strange how we hesitate in our attempted 
paraphrase and in the end drop it altogether, not because the 
understanding is too complicated or difficult but because the 
line is spoken so simply, even more simply and uniquely than 
any of the other familiar "ises" that are forever dropping un- 
noticed into our everyday speech. 

*T have omitted one of the examples from the translation: “Er 
ist des Todes," meaning literally "he is of death," or as Heidegger 
pun: below, "er ist dem Tode verfallen," *he has succumbed to 

eath. 

“Der Bauer ist aufs Feld" (“The peasant is to the fields") is a 
popular expression in German, not poetic as it would be in English 
were anyone to use it. R.M. 


76 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


Regardless of how we interpret these examples, they show 
one thing clearly: in the “is” being discloses itself to us in a 
diversity of ways. Once again the assertion, which at first 
seemed plausible, that being is an empty word is shown— 
more compellingly than ever—to be untrue. 

But—it might here be argued—granted that the “is” is 
meant in many different ways. This springs not from the “is” 
itself but solely from the diverse content of the statements, 
each of which applies to a different essent: God, earth, cup, 
peasant, book, famine, peace over the summits. Only because 
the "is" remains intrinsically indeterminate and devoid of 
meaning can it lie ready for such diverse uses, can it fulfill 
and determine itself “as the circumstances require.” The di- 
versity of definite meanings cited above proves the contrary 
of what was to be shown. It offers the clearest proof that in 
order to be determinable being must be indeterminate. 

What shall we say in reply to this? Here we come into the 
area of a decisive question: Does the “is” become manifold 
on the strength of the content brought to it in the different 
sentences, i.e. by virtue of the realms concerning which they 
speak, or does the “is,” i.e. being, conceal within itself the 
multiplicity whose concentration (Faltung, lit. "folding" in 
contrast to "unfolding") enables us to make manifold essents 
accessible to us, each as it is? For the present I merely throw 
out this question. We are not yet equipped to develop it fur- 
ther. What cannot be argued away—and this is the only point 
we wish to make for the moment—is that the “is” in our dis- 
course manifests a rich diversity of meanings. In each one of 
these meanings we say the “is” without, either before or after- 
ward, effecting a special exegesis of “is,” let alone reflecting 
on being. The "is," meant now so and now so, simply wells 
up as we speak. Yet the diversity of its meanings is not arbi- 
trary diversity. Let us now convince ourselves of this. 

We run through the different meanings that we have inter- 
preted by paraphrase. The “being” uttered in “is” means: 
really present, permanently there, takes place, come from, 
belongs to, is made of, stays, succumbs to, stands for, has 
entered upon, has appeared. It remains difficult, perhaps 
impossible, because contrary to the essence of being, to pick 
out a common meaning as a universal generic concept under 


THE QUESTION OF THE ESSENCE OF BEING v 


which all these modes of “is” might be classified as species. 
Yet a single determinate trait runs through them all. It directs 
our contemplation of "being" to a definite horizon, in which 
understanding is effected. The limitation of the meaning of 
"being" remains within the sphere of actuality and presence, 
of permanence and duration, of abiding and occurrence. 

All this points in the direction of what we encountered 
when we characterized the Greek experience and interpreta- 
tion of being. If we retain the usual interpretation of being, 
the word “being” takes its meaning from the unity and deter- 
minateness of the horizon which guided our understanding. 
In short: we understand the verbal substantive "Sein" through 
the infinitive, which in turn is related to the “is” and its di- 
versity that we have described. The definite and particular 
verb form “is,” the third person singular of the present indica- 
tive, has here a pre-eminent rank. We understand “being” not 
in regard to the “thou art,” “you are,” "I am,” or “they would 
be,” though all of these, just as much as “is,” represent verbal 
inflections of “to be.” "To be” (sein ) is for us the infinitive of 
"is." And involuntarily, almost as though nothing else were 
possible, we explain the infinitive “to be” to ourselves through 
the “is.” 

Accordingly, “being” has the meaning indicated above, 
recalling the Greek view of the essence of being, hence a de- 
terminateness which has not just dropped on us accidentally 
from somewhere but has dominated our historical being-there 
since antiquity. At one stroke our search for the definition of 
the meaning of the word “being” becomes explicitly what it 
is, namely a reflection on the source of our hidden history. 
The question “How does it stand with being?” must itself re- 
main within the history of being if it is, in turn, to unfold and 
preserve its own historical import. In pursuing it we, in turn, 
shall hold to the discourse of being. 


N “k 344 x 4 b, Tr 
Ls i mid - EY -— ipia 


adya n enin wider TAA imi 
aai oriad uit wi mm 
diode qe cma ERT] £o ' 
10 430m n SE APET | Er lobertte sic os 
‘hr tlie ts Gy codd emt oiie ania " 
> aged jae ty td ra ag må Turbo) » 
ts ami se s Oe Iw em Doi quitcut rogant i 
Pats gen sion tne kerros witAr 10$ nE E E 
- Sollee cmr ee riesi eb ciuile ume G EET i 
i ei dare alcreds ur cem air sehe c cn lg 
pails gem m ig Tan adit eed ra) apum c. 
"o aheu nde md osbrnaipile de cjue ur iyevebsss me T AL pr 
ode lk Fugo Tet" am Ir. afe Lothar ei aad co aid mc D t 
000 Gebyumad hoe eo chat ad? «ection row adel 
Heed. «teres fn docet 4 tuners Sell ai bed 
whe ve Sci N ai % “ews hy rne wed 
= Warsi “ee VT Tarh ue eT Tan dott” eee y 
$4 E AE MIS 2E. 1 LE. 
oai js OIM. CM -*— E T 
Mn c Slap gd zem a s cdm " aer Tu 7 
WO ELE UR Ml "E o A. mit atada U usn 
-— ur ate PEST | aur be "AGE x 

esti be ad^ pple opm sls st “pane: "v 

at-on trad Wo dora ue. Mel) “ee weno f diem n 
Listing? utn wah te vr £u Aen Er feo 
cms ih Loe kel apti a, aai 1 toad lad abay 1 
is Vek DR pcd. dep motus te chari tte d: E 
Ny úl v.3 ue Wie "E werd” urs wa. D» nme 
17 Li Uf) a Lp wel uae antes LA or 
X 7 z Uus =P) Logt 9 ened maiia fv 

hot tims? M 3) tr ui > (iestenireme: su pam 
‘ari te mnt g di p ELI 
ier os Dn aperti ema pai sed bid 


- 


T , ZU Eae iae uw ee 
o Pe Seem Te Teini so. i 
t oi! Ta wisp phog ne 
Serr ee (vernis Mek, A 
et c. Pd 41 | fov. € 
EJ E vu vow her 4d iu Lak 
ae, GA 


p à dn iilam 


x 


4. 


THE LIMITATION OF 
BEING 


Just as in the “is” we have a thoroughly familiar mode 
of discourse of being, so in the noun “being” we run into very 
definite modes of discourse that have even taken on a quality 
of formulas: being and becoming; being and appearance; 
being and thinking; being and the ought. 

When we say “being” we tend, almost as though under 
compulsion, to continue: being and . . . This “and” does not 
mean only that we casually throw in something else; no, we 
are adding something from which "being" is distinguished: 
being and not . . . But in these formula-like titles we also 
mean something which, differentiated from being, somehow 
belongs intrinsically to being, if only as its Other. 

The course of our questioning up to this point has illumi- 
nated more than its range. True, for the present we have per- 
ceived the question itself, the fundamental question of meta- 
physics, as a question proposed to us from somewhere outside. 
But we have come appreciably closer to an understanding of 
the value of this question. More and more it has proved to be 
a hidden ground of our historical being-there. This it remains 
even, and particularly, when, self-satisfied and busy with all 
manner of things, we move about over this ground as over a 
flimsily covered abyss ( Ab-grund ). 

Now we shall pursue the distinctions between being and 
other concepts. In so doing we shall learn that, contrary to 


80 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


the opinion current in this country, being is anything but an 
empty word and is indeed determined in so many aspects that 
we have difficulty in orienting ourselves so as to keep a suffi- 
cient grip on the determinateness. But this is not enough. The 
experience must be developed into a fundamental experience 
of our future historical being-there. In order that we may from 
the very outset effect (and participate in) the distinctions in 
the proper way, it may be well to give the following pointers: 

1. Being is delimited from something else; in this delimita- 
tion it already has determinateness. 

2. It is delimited in four interrelated respects. Accordingly, 
the determinateness of being must either become ramified and 
heightened or else diminish. 

3. These distinctions are by no means accidental. What 
is held apart in them belonged originally together and tends 
to merge. The distinctions therefore have an inner necessity. 

4. Consequently the oppositions, which look at first sight 
like formulas, did not arise fortuitously and find their way into 
the language as figures of speech. They arose in close connec- 
tion with the development of the concept of being, a process 
crucial for the history of the West. They began with the be- 
ginning of philosophical questioning. 

5. These distinctions have remained dominant not only in 
Western philosophy. They permeate all knowledge, action, 
and discourse even where they are not specifically mentioned 
or not in these words. 

6. The order in which the titles have been listed provides 
in itself an indication of the order in which they are internally 
linked and of the historical order in which they were shaped. 

The first two distinctions (being and becoming, being and 
appearance) were developed at the very beginning of Greek 
philosophy. As the oldest, they are also the best known. 

The third distinction (being and thinking) was foreshad- 
owed as early as the first two; its decisive unfolding occurred 
in the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, but it took on its actual 
form only with the beginning of the modern era. It even 
played an essential part in this beginning. As its history sug- 
gests, it is the most complex of the four distinctions and the 
most problematic in purpose. (For this reason it remains for 
us the one most worthy of questioning.) 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 81 


The fourth distinction (being and the ought) was only re- 
motely foreshadowed by the designation of the on (the es- 
sent, that which is) as agathon (the good ). It belongs wholly 
to the modern era. And since the end of the eighteenth cen- 
tury it has determined one of the dominant positions of the 
modern spirit toward the essent in general. 

7. If one is to ask the question of being radically, one must 
understand the task of unfolding the truth of the essence of 
being; one must come to a decision regarding the powers hid- 
den in these distinctions in order to restore them to their own 
truth. 

All these preliminary remarks should be borne constantly 
in mind in connection with the following considerations. 


1. Being and Becoming 


This distinction and opposition stands at the beginning of 
the inquiry into being. Today it is still the most current re- 
striction of being by something other; for it comes directly to 
mind from the standpoint of a conception of being that has 
congealed into the self-evident. What becomes is not yet. 
What is need no longer become. What "is," the essent, has 
left all becoming behind it if indeed it ever became or could 
become. What “is” in the authentic sense also resists every 
onsurge of becoming. 

Parmenides lived at the turn of the fifth century B.c. Far- 
sighted thinker and poet, he set forth the being of the essent 
in contradistinction to becoming. His “didactic poem” has 
come down to us only in fragments, but in large and impor- 
tant ones. Here I shall cite only a few verses (Fragment 8, 
lines 1-6): 


But only the legend remains of the way 
(along which it is disclosed) how it stands with being; on this 
(way) there are many indications: 
how being, without genesis, is without destruction, 
complete ( voll-stindig, fully standing ), alone there 
without tremor and not still requiring to be finished; 
nor was it before, nor will it be in the future, 


82 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


for being present it is entirely, unique, unifying, united, 
gathering itself in itself from itself (cohesive, 
full of presentness).? 


These few words stand there like the Greek statues of the 
early period. What we still possess of Parmenides’ didactic 
poem fits into a thin brochure, but this little brochure is one 
which might perfectly well replace whole libraries of sup- 
posedly indispensable philosophical literature. Anyone living 
today who knows the measure of such thinking discourse must 
lose all desire to write books. 

What is said here from within the heart of being consists 
of sémata, not signs of being, not predicates, but indications 
which in looking-toward being from within being indicate 
being. For in thus looking-toward being we must, in an active 
sense, look-away from all coming-into-being and passing-away, 
etc.: in the act of seeing we must hold them away, expel them. 
What is kept away by a- and oude is not commensurate with 
being. It has another measure. 

To this discourse, we conclude, being appears as the pure 
fullness of the permanent, gathered within it, untouched by 
unrest and change. Even today it is customary in describing 
the beginning of Western philosophy to oppose the doctrine 
of Heraclitus to this doctrine of Parmenides. A much-quoted 
saying is attributed to Heraclitus: panta rhei, everything is 
in flux. Accordingly there is no being. Everything “is” be- 
coming. 

The occurrence of such oppositions, here being, there be- 
coming, is accepted as perfectly natural, because it seems to 
provide an example, from the very beginning of philosophy, 
of a state of affairs that is supposed to run through the whole 
history of philosophy, namely that where one philosopher 
says A, another will say B, but that if the second says A, the 
first will say B. Yet when it is argued in answer to this suppo- 
sition that all thinkers throughout the history of philosophy 
have said fundamentally the same thing, this too seems to 

* póvog 8' Ett poç ó80io0/ Ae(merat óc ~otw. TtavTn © eri 
onpar’ Éaci/ T0MA& WGA’, OS &yévnrov ðv &vóAcOpóv got, Éovi 
yap ovAopedéc te Kal &rpegég 18? &r£AeoTov, o08é Trot’ ñv où’ 
éotat, émel viv got po mâv,/ Ev, cuvexéc. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 83 


impose on common sense. If they all say the same thing, why 
the whole multifarious and complicated history of Western 
philosophy? If that were so, one philosophy would suffice. 
And yet this “sameness” has an inner truth, namely the inex- 
haustible richness of what on every single day is as though 
that day were its first. 

Actually Heraclitus, to whom is ascribed the doctrine of 
becoming as diametrically opposed to Parmenides doctrine 
of being, says the same as Parmenides. He would not be one 
of the greatest of the great Greeks if he had said something 
different. But his doctrine of becoming must not be interpreted 
in line with the ideas of nineteenth-century Darwinism. It is 
true that the opposition between being and becoming was 
never again represented so uniquely and self-sufficiently as in 
Parmenides. In that great age, in Parmenides, the saga of the 
being of the essent itself partakes of the (hidden) essence of 
the being of which it speaks. The secret of greatness resides 
in its historic necessity. For reasons that will become clear in 
the following, we shall limit our present discussion of this first 
distinction—“being and becoming"—to these few indications. 


2. Being and Appearance 


This distinction is as old as the first. The fact that the two 
distinctions (being and becoming, being and appearance) are 
equally primordial points to a profound connection between 
them. Hitherto this connection has been inaccessible to us. It 
has not been possible to redevelop the second distinction (be- 
ing and appearance) in its true meaning. To do so one must un- 
derstand it in its original, i.e. Greek, sense. For us, burdened 
as we are with the modern epistemological misinterpretation 
—for us who scarcely respond, and then for the most part 
emptily, to the simplicity of the essential-this is no easy 
matter. 

At first sight the distinction seems clear. Being and appear- 
ance means: the real in contradistinction to the unreal; the 
authentic over against the inauthentic. The distinction implies 
an evaluation—the preference is given to being. As we say: 
the miracle and the miraculous, so we say appearance and 


84 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


the apparent. Often the distinction between being and ap- 
pearance is carried back to our first distinction—being and be- 
coming. The apparent is that which from time to time emerges 
and vanishes, the ephemeral and unstable over against being 
as the permanent. 

The distinction between being and appearance is familiar 
to us, another of the many worn-out coins that we pass un- 
examined from hand to hand in an everyday life that has 
grown flat. When it turns up, we use the distinction as a rule 
of life, a moral admonition to avoid appearance and to strive 
for being: “to be rather than seem.” 

Yet familiar and self-evident as the distinction is, we do 
not understand in what way a fundamental separation occurs 
between precisely being and appearance. The very fact that 
it occurs suggests that the two are related. Wherein does the 
bond consist? First we must understand the hidden unity of 
being and appearance. We have ceased to understand it be- 
cause we have fallen away from the initial, historically de- 
veloped difference and merely carry it around as something 
that was once, somewhere and at some time, put into circu- 
lation. 

To grasp the difference we must here again go back to the 
beginning. 

But if, before it is too late, we turn our backs on idle, 
thoughtless chatter, we shall find, even in ourselves, a track 
leading to the understanding of the difference. We say “ap- 
pearance" and we know the rain and the sunshine. The sun 
shines (scheinen, “to seem" and “to shine" ). We say: “the 
room was feebly lighted by the glow (Schein) of a candle." 
The Alemanic dialect has the word “Scheinholz,” wood that 
glows in the darkness. From pictures of saints we know the 
halo (Heiligenschein), the glowing ring about their heads. 
But we also know pseudo saints (Scheinheilige ), those who 
look like saints but are not saints. We are familiar with the 
sham battle ( Scheingefecht ) or simulated battle. The sun, as 
it shines ( scheint ) seems ( scheint) to move around the earth. 
The moon which shines seems, but only seems, to measure 
two feet in diameter, that is only an illusion (Schein). Here 
we run into two different kinds of Schein and scheinen. But 
they do not simply stand side by side; no, one is a variant of 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 85 


the other. The sun, for example, can have the appearance 
(Schein) of moving round the earth only because it shines, 
ie. glows and in glowing manifests itself, i.e. comes to light 
(zum Vorschein ). In the shining of the sun, to be sure, we at 
the same time experience its radiation as heat. The sun shines: 
it shows itself and we feel warmth. In the halo the shining of 
the light makes the wearer manifest ( bringt zum Vorschein ) 
as a saint. 

On closer scrutiny we find three modes of Schein: 1) 
Schein as radiance and glow; 2) Schein and Scheinen as 
appearing, as coming to light; 3) Schein as mere appearance 
or semblance ( Anschein). But at the same time it becomes 
clear that the second variety of “Scheinen,” appearing in the 
sense of showing itself, pertains both to Schein as radiance 
and to Schein as semblance, and not as a fortuitous attribute 
but as the ground of their possibility. The essence of appear- 
ance (Schein) lies in the appearing ( Erscheinen ). It is self- 
manifestation, self-representation, standing-there, presence. 
The long-awaited book has just appeared, i.e. it is before 
us, and therefore to be had. When we say: the moon shines 
( scheint ), this means not only that it spreads a glow (Schein ), 
a certain brightness, but also: it stands in the sky, it is present, 
it is. The stars shine: glittering, they are present. Here appear- 
ance (Schein) means exactly the same as being. (Sappho's 
verses: asteres men amphi kalan sellanan . . . and the poem 
by Matthias Claudius, “Ein Wiegenlied bei Mondschein zu 
singen," provide a suitable basis for reflection on being and 
appearance.) 

If we meditate on the above, we find the inner connection 
between being and appearance. But we grasp it fully only 
if we understand being in an equally primordial, i.e. Greek, 
sense. We know that being disclosed itself to the Greeks as 
physis. The realm of emerging and abiding is intrinsically at 
the same time a shining appearing (das scheinende Er- 
scheinen ). The radicals phy and pha name the same thing. 
Phyein, self-sufficient emergence, is phainesthai, to flare up, 
to show itself, to appear. Already the traits of being that we 
have meanwhile listed without really going into them, and 
our reference to Parmenides, have given us a certain under- 
standing of the basic Greek word for being. 


86 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


It would be instructive to elucidate the meaning of this 
word through the great poetry of the Greeks. Here it may 
suffice to point out that for Pindar phya was the fundamental 
determination of man's being-there: to de phya krattiston, that 
which is through and from out of phya is the mightiest of all 
(Olympian Ode rx, 100); phya means what one originally 
and authentically is: the past and essential ( das Ge-Wesende ) 
as opposed to the subsequently imposed bustle and pretense. 
Being is the fundamental attribute of the noble individual and 
of nobility (i.e. of what has a high origin and rests in it). In 
regard to this Pindar coins the saying genoi’ hoios essi mathon 
(Pythian Ode n, 72). “Mayest thou by learning come forth 
as what thou art." But for the Greeks standing-in-itself was 
nothing other than standing-there, standing-in-the-light. Be- 
ing means appearing. Appearing is not something subsequent 
that sometimes happens to being. Appearing is the very es- 
sence of being. 

This punctures the empty construction of Greek philosophy 
as a "realistic" philosophy which, unlike modern subjectivism, 
was a doctrine of objective being. This widespread concep- 
tion is based on a superficial understanding. We must leave 
aside terms like "subjective" and “objective,” “realistic” and 
“idealistic.” 

Only now are we in a position, on the basis of a more ap- 
propriate view of being as the Greeks saw it, to take the de- 
cisive step which will open up to us the inner relationship 
between being and appearance; to gain an insight into a re- 
lationship which is originally and uniquely Greek but which 
compassed characteristic consequences for the spirit of the 
West. The essence of being is physis. Appearing is the power 
that emerges. Appearing makes manifest. Already we know 
then that being, appearing, causes to emerge from conceal- 
ment. Since the essent as such is, it places itself in and stands 
in unconcealment, alétheia. We translate, and at the same 
time thoughtlessly misinterpret, this word as “truth.” To be 
sure, people are gradually beginning to translate the Greek 
word alétheia literally. But this does not help much if one 
goes right on to construe “truth” in a totally different un- 
Greek sense and attribute this other sense to the Greek word. 
For the Greek essence of truth is possible only in one with the 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 87 


Greek essence of being as physis. On the strength of the 
unique and essential relationship between physis and alétheia 
the Greeks would have said: The essent is true insofar as it 
is. The true as such is essent. This means: The power that 
manifests itself stands in unconcealment. In showing itself, 
the unconcealed as such comes to stand. Truth as un-conceal- 
ment is not an appendage to being. 

Truth is inherent in the essence of being. To be an essent 
—this comprises to come to light, to appear on the scene, to 
take one's (its) place (sich hin-stellen), to produce (her- 
stellen ) something. Nonbeing, on the other hand, means: to 
withdraw from appearing, from presence. The essence of ap- 
pearing includes coming-on-the-scene and withdrawing, hither 
and thither in the truly demonstrative, indicative sense. Be- 
ing is thus dispersed among the manifold essents. These dis- 
play themselves as the momentary and close-at-hand. In ap- 
pearing it gives itself an aspect, dokei. Doxa means aspect, re- 
gard ( Ansehen ), namely the regard in which one stands. If 
the regard, in keeping with what emerges in it, is a distin- 
guished one, doxa means fame and glory. In Hellenistic the- 
ology and in the New Testament doxa theou, gloria Dei, is 
God's grandeur. To glorify, to attribute regard to, and disclose 
regard means in Greek: to place in the light and thus endow 
with permanence, being. For the Greeks glory was not some- 
thing additional which one might or might not obtain; it was 
the mode of the highest being. For modems glory has long 
been nothing more than celebrity and as such a highly dubi- 
ous affair, an acquisition tossed about and distributed by the 
newspapers and the radio—almost the opposite of being. If 
for Pindar to glorify was the essence of poetry and the work 
of the poet was to place in the light, it was not because the 
notion of light played a special role for him but solely because 
he thought and composed poetry as a Greek, which is to say 
that he stood in the appointed essence of being. 


We wished to show that for the Greeks appearing belonged 
to being, or more precisely that the essence of being lay partly 
in appearing. This has been clarified through the supreme pos- 
sibility of human being, as fashioned by the Greeks, through 
glory and glorification. Glory is in Greek doxa. Dokeó means: 


88 


AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


I show myself, appear, enter into the light. Here the emphasis 
is on sight and aspect, the regard in which a man stands; in 
the other Greek word for glory, kleos, it is on hearing and call- 
ing. Thus glory is the fame ( Ruf, call, reputation, fame) in 
which one stands. Heraclitus says (Fragment 29): "for the 
noblest choose one thing before all else: glory, everlastingly 
abiding over against things mortal; but the many are glutted 
like cattle."* 

But to all this there comes a limitation which at the same 
time indicates the full richness of the context. Doxa is the re- 
gard in which a man stands, in a broader sense the regard 
( Ansehen, looking-at, esteem ) which every essent conceals 
and discloses in its appearance ( Aussehen ) (eidos, idea). A 
city presents a magnificent view. The aspect which an essent 
has in itself, and which it can offer only for this reason, may 
in every case be perceived from this or that point of view. Ac- 
cording to the diversity of viewpoint, the aspect that offers 
itself changes. Hence the aspect is always one that we take 
and make for ourselves. In experiencing and dealing with es- 
sents, we are always forming views of their appearance. Often 
we do so without looking closely at the thing itself. In various 
ways and for various reasons we form a view of the thing. We 
form an opinion about it. Sometimes the view that we ad- 
vocate has no support in the thing itself. Then it is only a view, 
an assumption. We assume a thing to be thus or thus. Then all 
we have is an opinion. To assume is in Greek dechesthai. (Ac- 
ceptance remains related to the offer of the appearance.) 
Doxa as something assumed to be thus and thus is opinion. 

Now we have come to the point at which we were aiming. 
Because being, physis, consists in appearing, in an offering of 
appearance and views, it stands, essentially and hence neces- 
sarily and permanently, in the possibility of an appearance 
which precisely covers over and conceals what the essent in 
truth, i.e. in unconcealment, is. This regard in which the es- 
sent now comes to stand is Schein in the sense of Anschein 
(semblance). Where there is unconcealment of the essent, 
there is a possibility of Schein and conversely: where the es- 


* oipeUvrat yàp v vrtů &mávrov oi apiotot, KkAéog &évaov 
Ovqràv, oi 6& moXAol kekópnyrott Skwottep kTiü|vea. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 89 


sent stands and has stood unwaveringly in Schein, the ap- 
pearance ( Schein ) can shatter and fall away. 

The word doxa is a name for diverse things: 1) regard as 
glory; 2) regard as sheer vision that offers something; 3) re- 
gard as mere looking-so: "appearance" as mere semblance; 4) 
view that a man forms, opinion. The many meanings of this 
word are not the result of careless speech; they are a playing 
deeply grounded in the mature wisdom of a great language 
which in this word preserves essential traits of being. For a 
sound approach to this matter we must take care not to falsify 
appearance by taking it as something merely "imagined," "sub- 
jective.” No, appearance, just as much as appearing, belongs 
to the essent. 

Let us think of the sun. Every day it rises and sets for us. 
Only a very few astronomers, physicists, philosophers—and 
even they only on the basis of a specialized approach which 
may be more or less widespread—experience this state of af- 
fairs otherwise, namely as a motion of the earth around the 
sun. But the appearance in which sun and earth stand, e.g. 
the early morning landscape, the sea in the evening, the night, 
is an appearing. This appearance is not nothing. Nor is it un- 
true. Nor is it a mere appearance of conditions in nature which 
are really otherwise. This appearance is historical and it is 
history, discovered and grounded in poetry and myth and 
thus an essential area of our world. 

Only the tired latecomers with their supercilious wit im- 
agine that they can dispose of the historical power of appear- 
ance by declaring it to be "subjective," hence very dubious. 
The Greeks experienced it differently. They were perpetually 
compelled to wrest being from appearance and preserve it 
against appearance. (The essence of being is un-concealment.) 

Solely in the enduring struggle between being and appear- 
ance did they wrest being from the essent, did they carry the 
essent to permanence and unconcealment: the gods and the 
state, the temples and the tragedy, the games and philosophy; 
all this in the midst of appearance, beset by appearance, but 
also taking it seriously, knowing of its power. It was in the 
Sophists and in Plato that appearance was declared to be mere 
appearance and thus degraded. At the same time being, as 
idea, was exalted to a suprasensory realm. A chasm, chorismos, 


90 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


was created between the merely apparent essent here below 
and real being somewhere on high. In that chasm Christianity 
settled down, at the same time reinterpreting the lower as the 
created and the higher as the creator. These refashioned weap- 
ons it turned against antiquity (as paganism) and so disfig- 
ured it. Nietzsche was right in saying that Christianity is Plato- 
nism for the people. 

Distinct from all this, the great age of Greece was a single 
creative self-assertion amid the confused, intricate struggle 
between the powers of being and appearance. (In regard to 
the original relation between human being-there, being as 
such, and truth in the sense of unconcealment and untruth 
as concealment, see Sein und Zeit $8 44 and 68.) 

For the thinking of the early Greek thinkers the unity and 
conflict of being and appearance preserved their original 
power. All this was represented with supreme purity in Greek 
tragic poetry. Let us consider the Oedipus Rex of Sophocles. 
At the beginning Oedipus is the savior and lord of the state, 
living in an aura of glory and divine favor. He is hurled out of 
this appearance, which is not merely his subjective view of 
himself but the medium in which his being-there appears; his 
being as murderer of his father and desecrator of his mother 
is raised to unconcealment. The way from the radiant begin- 
ning to the gruesome end is one struggle between appearance 
(concealment and distortion) and unconcealment (being). 
The city is beset by the secret of the murderer of Laius, the 
former king. With the passion of a man who stands in the 
manifestness of glory and is a Greek, Oedipus sets out to re- 
veal this secret. Step by step, he must move into unconceal- 
ment, which in the end he can bear only by putting out his 
own eyes, i.e. by removing himself from all light, by letting 
the cloak of night fall round him, and, blind, crying out to 
the people to open all doors in order that a man may be 
made manifest to them as what he is. 

But we cannot regard Oedipus only as the man who meets 
his downfall; we must see him as the embodiment of Greek 
being-there, who most radically and wildly asserts its funda- 
mental passion, the passion for disclosure of being, i.e. the 
struggle for being itself. In his poem “In lieblicher Bliue 
blühet . . .” Hölderlin wrote keen-sightedly: “Perhaps King 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 91 


Oedipus has an eye too many.” This eye too many is the funda- 
mental condition for all great questioning and knowledge and 
also their only metaphysical ground. The knowledge and the 
science of the Greeks were this passion. 

Today science is admonished to serve the nation, and that 
is a very necessary and estimable demand, but it is too little 
and not the essential. The hidden will to refashion the essent 
into the manifestness of its being demands more. In order to 
recapture the pristine knowledge that has degenerated into 
science, our being-there must attain a very different meta- 
physical depth. It must once again achieve an established and 
truly built relation to the being of the essent as a whole. 

Our relation to everything that makes up being, truth, and 
appearance has long been so confused, so devoid of founda- 
tion and passion, that even in our manner of interpreting Greek 
poetry and making it our own we barely suspect the power 
wielded by this poetic discourse in Greek being-there. Karl 
Reinhardt's recent interpretation of Sophocles (1933) comes 
appreciably closer to Greek being-there and being than all 
previous attempts, because Reinhardt sees and questions the 
tragic process on the basis of the fundamental relations be- 
tween being, unconcealment, and appearance. Though mod- 
ern subjectivisms and psychologisms still find their way into 
it, his interpretation of the Oedipus Rex as the "tragedy of ap- 
pearance" remains a magnificent achievement. 

I shall conclude this reference to the poetic form of the 
struggle between being and appearance among the Greeks 
by quoting a passage from Sophocles' Oedipus Rex, which will 
permit us, without forcing matters, to establish the connection 
between our provisional characterization of Greek being as 
stability and the characterization, now attained, of being as 
appearing. 

The brief final chorus of the tragedy (lines 1189 ff.) runs: 
“What man has in him more controlled and ordered being- 
there than he requires to stand in appearance and then, hav- 
ing done so, to incline (namely from standing-straight-in- 
himself) ?"* 

* tig yap tig &vip mAéov 

Tao EevSaipoviag pépet 
fj 1ooo0rov Sc0v Soxeiv 
xoi 66&£avr' &mokàivai. 


92 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


In explaining the essence of the infinitive, we spoke of cer- 
tain words that represent an enklisis, a bending-away, a 
falling-over (casus). Now we see that appearance as a variant 
of being is the same as a falling-over. It is a variant of being 
in the sense of standing-there-upright-in-oneself. Both devia- 
tions from being are determined on the basis of being as per- 
manent standing-in-the-light, i.e. appearing. 

Now it has become clearer that appearance belongs to be- 
ing itself as appearing. Being as appearance is no less a power 
than being as unconcealment. Appearance takes place in and 
with the essent itself. But appearance not only makes the es- 
sent as such appear as what it actually is not; it not only dis- 
torts the essent whose appearance it is; no, it even cloaks 
itself as appearance insofar as it shows itself as being. Be- 
cause appearance thus essentially distorts itself in its cloaking 
and dissembling, we rightly say that appearance deceives. This 
deception lies in the appearance itself. Only because appear- 
ance itself deceives can it deceive man and lead him into illu- 
sion. But illusion is only one among the modes according to 
which man moves in the interlocking threefold world of be- 
ing, unconcealment, and appearance. 

The area, as it were, which opens in the interwovenness of 
being, unconcealment, and appearance—this area I understand 
as error. Appearance, deception, illusion, error stand in definite 
essential and dynamic relations which have long been misin- 
terpreted by psychology and epistemology and which conse- 
quently, in our daily lives, we have well-nigh ceased to ex- 
perience and recognize as powers. 

It has been necessary to show how, on the basis of the 
Greek interpretation of being as physis, and only on this basis, 
both truth in the sense of unconcealment and appearance as 
a definite mode of emerging self-manifestation belong neces- 
sarily to being. 

Because being and appearance belong together and, be- 
longing together, are always side by side, the one changing 
unceasingly into the other; because in this change they pre- 
sent the possibility of error and confusion, the main effort of 
thought at the beginning of philosophy, i.e. in the first dis- 
closure of the being of the essent, was necessarily to rescue 
being from its plight of being submerged in appearance, to 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 93 


differentiate being from appearance. This in turn made it 
necessary to secure the priority of truth as unconcealment 
over concealment, of discovery over occultation and distor- 
tion. But as it became necessary to differentiate being from 
the other and to consolidate it as physis, being was differenti- 
ated from nonbeing, while nonbeing was differentiated from 
appearance. The two differentiations do not coincide. 

Because of this relation between being, unconcealment, ap- 
pearance, and nonbeing, the man who holds to being as it 
opens round him and whose attitude toward the essent is de- 
termined by his adherence to being, must take three paths. 
If he is to take over being-there in the radiance of being, he 
must bring being to stand, he must endure it in appearance 
and against appearance, and he must wrest both appearance 
and being from the abyss of nonbeing. 

Man must distinguish these three ways and accordingly 
he must decide for them and against them. Thought at the 
beginning of philosophy was the opening and laying-out of 
the three paths. Discrimination (das Unterscheiden) placed 
sapient man on these paths and at their crossing, hence in a 
permanent decision ( Ent-scheidung ). It is with this decision 
that history begins. Even the decision concerning the gods 
resided in this decision and in it alone. (Accordingly decision 
means here not man's judgment and choice, but a separation 
in the above-mentioned togetherness of being, unconcealment, 
appearance, and nonbeing.) 

The philosophy of Parmenides, as it has come down to us 
in his didactic poem, is our oldest record of the opening of 
these three paths. We may characterize the three paths by 
quoting a few fragments of the poem. A complete commen- 
tary is not possible here. 

In translation, Fragment 4 runs: 


Come, I will tell you: heed well the words that you 
hear (as to) which ways of inquiry are alone to be considered. 
The one: how it is (how it, being, is), and how also nonbeing 
(is) impossible. 

This is the path of justified confidence, for it follows uncon- 
cealment. 

The other: that it is not and also that nonbeing (is) necessary. 


94 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


This then, I tell you, is a path which cannot be counseled, 

neither can you make acquaintance with nonbeing, for it can- 
not be brought forward, 

nor can you indicate it in words. 


Here, for the present, two paths are sharply marked off 
from one another: 

1. The path to being; it is at the same time the way to un- 
concealment. This path is inevitable. 

2. The path to nonbeing; to be sure, it cannot be traveled, 
but for this very reason it must be made known that this path 
is unviable, particularly in view of the fact that it leads to 
nonbeing. This fragment provides perhaps the oldest philo- 
sophical statement to the effect that along with the way of 
being the way of nonbeing must be specially considered, 
that it is therefore a misunderstanding of the question of 
being to turn one's back on nothing with the assurance that 
nothing is obviously not. (For that nothing is not an essent 
does not prevent it from belonging to being in its own way.) 

But reflection on these two paths encompasses a coming- 
to-grips with a third which runs counter to the first in a par- 
ticular way. The third path looks like the first, but it does 
not lead to being. It seems therefore to be no more than an- 
other way to nonbeing in the sense of nothing. 

Fragment 6 starts by sharply opposing the two paths in- 
dicated in Fragment 4, the path to being and the path to 
nothing. But then a third path is indicated, counter to the 
second which leads to nothing and is therefore without issue. 


Needful is the gathering setting-forth as well the apprehen- 
sion: the essent in its being; 

For the essent has being; nonbeing has no “is”; this I bid you 
consider. 

Above all avoid this way of questioning. 

But also that other which men, knowing nothing, two-headed, 

Cut out for themselves; for disorientation 

Is the guide to their erring understanding; they are thrown 
hither and thither, 

dull-witted, blind, perplexed; the brotherhood of those who 
do not differentiate, 

whose dictum it is that the essent and nonessent are the same 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 05 


and also not the same—to them in all ways the path is con- 
trary. 


The path now mentioned is that of doxa in the sense of 
appearance. Along this path the essent looks now thus and 
now otherwise. Here only opinions prevail Men slide back 
and forth from one opinion to another. They mix being and 
appearance. 

This path is perpetually traveled and on it men lose them- 
selves entirely. 

It is all the more necessary to know this path as such, in 
order that being may disclose itself in appearance and against 
appearance. 

Accordingly we find this third path and its relation to the 
first indicated in Fragment 1, lines 28-32: 


. . . It is necessary (for you who are now entering 
on the path to being) to experience everything, 

the untrembling heart of well-rounded unconcealment as well 
as the views of men, in which there dwells no reli- 
ance on the unconcealed. 

But with all this you should also learn how appearance per- 
sists in appearingly drawing (in its own way) 
through all things, contributing to complete all 
things. 


The third path is that of appearance, but in a particular 
way, for on this path appearance is experienced as belonging 
to being. For the Greeks the words we have quoted possessed 
an original force. Being and truth draw their essence from 
physis. The self-manifestation of the apparent belongs imme- 
diately to being and yet again (fundamentally) does not be- 
long to it. Therefore appearing must be exposed as mere ap- 
pearance, and this over and over again. 

Intrinsically the indications of the threefold path are one: 

The path to being is inevitable. 

The path to nothing is inaccessible. 

The path to appearance is always accessible and trav- 
eled, but one can go around it. 

A truly sapient man is therefore not one who blindly pur- 
sues a truth, but only one who is always cognizant of all three 


96 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


paths, that of being, that of nonbeing, and that of appearance. 
Superior knowledge—and all knowledge is superiority—is 
given only to the man who has known the buoyant storm on 
the path of being, who has known the dread of the second path 
to the abyss of nothing, but who has taken upon himself the 
third way, the arduous path of appearance. 

This knowledge includes what the Greeks in their great 
age called tolma: to undertake the venture of being, nonbeing, 
and appearance all at once, i.e. to take upon oneself being- 
there as a de-cision between being, nonbeing, and appearance. 
From out of this fundamental attitude toward being, one of 
their greatest poets, Pindar (Nemean Ode m, 70), said: en 
de peirai telos diaphainetai; in venturesome exploration of the 
essent is manifested perfection, the limitation of that which 
has been brought, and come, to stand, i.e. being. 

Here speaks the same basic attitude that shines forth from 
Heraclitus’ saying about polemos. It is struggle, setting-apart 
( Aus-einander-Setzung ), i.e. not mere quarreling and wran- 
gling but the conflict of the conflicting, that sets the essential 
and the nonessential, the high and the low, in their limits and 
makes them manifest. 

The mature certainty of this attitude toward being is as 
boundlessly admirable as the richness of its configurations in 
words and in stone. 

We conclude our elucidation of the opposition, i.e. at the 
same time, the unity, of being and appearance with a saying 
of Heraclitus (Fragment 123): physis kryptesthai philei. “Be- 
ing (emerging appearing) inclines intrinsically to self-conceal- 
ment.” Since being means emerging appearing, to issue forth 
from concealment—concealment, its origin in concealment, 
belongs to it essentially. This origin lies in the essence of be- 
ing, of the manifest as such. Being inclines back toward it, 
both in great silence and mystery and in banal distortion and 
occultation. The close relation between physis and kryptesthai 
discloses both the intimate bond and the conflict between be- 
ing and appearance. 

If we take the formula “being and appearance” in the un- 
diminished force of the differentiation which the Greeks won 
at the beginning of their thinking, the difference and delimi- 
tation of being over against appearance become compre- 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 97 


hensible, and moreover we understand its intimate relation 
with the differentiation between “being and becoming." What 
is situated in becoming is no longer nothing and it is not yet 
that which it is destined to become. In view of this “no longer 
and not yet," becoming is shot through with nonbeing. Yet 
it is not pure nothing, but no longer this and not yet that 
and as such perpetually other. Consequently it looks now 
this way and now that. It presents an intrinsically unstable 
aspect. Thus seen, becoming is an appearance of being. 

In the initial disclosure of the being of the essent, it was 
therefore necessary to oppose becoming as well as appear- 
ance to being. On the other hand, becoming as "emerging" 
belongs to physis. If we take them both in the Greek sense— 
becoming as coming-into-presence and going-out of it; being 
as emerging, appearing presence; nonbeing as absence—then 
the reciprocal relation between emerging and declining is ap- 
pearing, being itself. Just as becoming is the appearance of 
being, so appearance as appearing is a becoming of being. 

This makes it clear that we may not simply reduce the dis- 
tinction between “being and appearance” to that between 
“being and becoming,” or the other way around. Consequently 
the question of the relation between the two distinctions will 
have to remain open for the present. The answer will depend 
on the radicalness, breadth, and solidity with which we ground 
the being of the essent. And in the beginning philosophy did 
not tie itself down to single propositions. The subsequent ac- 
counts of its history create the contrary impression, to be 
sure, for they are doxographical, i.e. a description of the opin- 
ions and views of the great thinkers. But anyone who searches 
the great thinkers for their opinions and viewpoints can be 
sure of going astray before obtaining a result, i.e. the formula 
or signpost for a philosophy. The thinking and being-there of 
the Greeks were a struggle for a decision between the great 
powers of being and becoming, being and appearance. Inevi- 
tably this struggle molded the relation between thinking and 
being into a definite form. The third distinction was begin- 
ning to take shape. 


98 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


3. Being and Thinking 


The crucial importance of the distinction between “being” 
and "thinking" in Western existence has often been pointed 
out. This pre-eminence must have its ground in the essence 
of the distinction, that is, in what sets it off from the first two 
and from the fourth as well. Hence I should like to begin by 
indicating its special character. First we shall compare it with 
those already discussed. In them what is distinguished from 
being comes to us from the essent itself. We find it in the realm 
of the essent. Not only becoming but also appearance con- 
front us in the essent as such (cf. the rising and setting sun, 
the famous stick that looks broken when immersed in water, 
and so on). Becoming and appearance are situated as it were 
on the same plane as the being of the essent. 

But in the distinction between being and thinking, not 
only is what is contrasted with being, namely thinking, dif- 
ferent in content from becoming and appearance, but more- 
over the sense of the opposition is essentially different. Think- 
ing sets itself off against being in such a way that being is 
placed before ( vor-gestellt, represented ) it and consequently 
stands opposed to it (entgegensteht) as an object ( Gegen- 
stand ). This is not the case in the previous distinctions. Now 
we see how this distinction can achieve a pre-eminence. It 
predominates because it does not situate itself in between 
and among the other three decisions but represents them all, 
and thus representing them ( vorsichstellend, placing them 
before itself) transposes (umstellt) them, as it were. So it 
comes about that thinking is not merely the contrary member 
of some new distinction but the foundation and fulcrum on 
the basis of which the opposite is determined, so much so that 
being takes on its entire interpretation from thinking. 

It is in this direction that we must appraise the signifi- 
cance of this differentiation for our present task. For funda- 
mentally we are asking how it stands with being, how and 
whence its essence is established, understood, grasped, and 
posited as the determining category. 

In the seemingly unimportant distinction between being 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 99 


and thinking we must discern the fundamental position of the 
Western spirit, against which our central attack is directed. 
It can be overcome only by a return to its origins, i.e. we 
must place its initial truth within its own limits and so put 
it on a new foundation. 

From the vantage point to which our questioning has now 
brought us we can survey another aspect. We have shown 
that, contrary to the current opinion, the word “being” has 
a strictly circumscribed meaning. This implies that being it- 
self is understood in a definite way. Thus understood, it is 
manifest to us. But all understanding, as a fundamental mode 
of disclosure, must move in a definite line of sight. The nature 
of this thing, the clock for example, remains closed to us un- 
less we know something in advance about such things as time, 
reckoning with time, the measurement of time. The line of 
sight must be laid down in advance. We call it the “perspec- 
tive," the track of fore-sight ( Vorblickbahn ). Thus we shall 
see not only that being is not understood in an indeterminate 
way but that the determinate understanding of being moves 
in a predetermined perspective. 

To move back and forth, to slip and slide along this track 
have become second nature with us, so much so that we nei- 
ther have knowledge of it nor even consider or understand 
the inquiry into it. We have become immersed (not to say 
lost) in this perspective, this line of sight which sustains and 
guides all our understanding of being. And what makes our 
immersion the more complete as well as the more hidden is 
that even the Greeks did not and could not bring this perspec- 
tive to light, and this for essential reasons (not for reasons of 
human deficiency). Still, the growth of the differentiation be- 
tween being and thinking played an important part in forming 
and stabilizing this perspective in which the Greek under- 
standing of being moved. 

Nevertheless we have accorded this distinction third and 
not first place. We shall first attempt to elucidate it in the 
same way as the first two. 

We begin again with a general characterization of what 
is now opposed to being. 

What does thinking mean? We say "Man thinks, God gov- 
erns” (“der Mensch denkt, Gott lenkt," usually translated as 


100 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


"man proposes, God disposes" ). Here thinking means to con- 
trive, to plan this and that; to think of something (denken 
auf) means to have it in view, to aim at it. "To think evil" 
means to intend evil; to think of ( denken an ) something means 
not to forget it. Here thinking means to remember. We use the 
turn of phrase “to think nothing of it.” Here thinking means 
to imagine. Someone says: I think it will turn out all right, i.e. 
it seems to me; I am of the opinion. To think in an emphatic 
sense means to reflect, to think something over, a situation, a 
plan, an event. “Thinking” serves also as a name for the work 
of those whom we call "thinkers." In contrast to animals, all 
men think, but not every man is a thinker. 

What do we infer from this linguistic usage? Thinking re- 
fers to the future as well as the past, but also to the present. 
Thinking brings something before us, represents it. This rep- 
resentation always starts from ourselves, it is a free act, but 
not an arbitrary one, for it is bound by the fact that in repre- 
senting we think of what is represented and think it through by 
dissecting it, by taking it apart and putting it together again. 
But in thinking we not only place something before ourselves, 
we not only dismember it for the sake of dismembering, but, 
reflecting, we pursue the thing represented. We do not simply 
accept it as it happens to fall to us; no, we undertake, as we 
say, to get behind the thing. We find out how it stands with 
the thing in general. We get an idea of it. We seek the uni- 
versal. 

From these listed characteristics of what we commonly call 
"thinking," we shall for the present single out three: 

i. Re-presentation "of our own accord"—considered as a 
uniquely free act. 

2. Re-presentation as analytical synthesis. 

3. Grasp of the universal through re-presentation. 

According to the sphere in which this re-presentation moves, 
according to the degree of freedom, the sharpness and sure- 
ness of the analysis, and the breadth of its scope, thinking is 
superficial or profound, empty or meaningful, irresponsible 
or compelling, playful or serious. 

But all this does not tell us, without further inquiry, why 
thinking should enter into the fundamental relation to being, 
indicated above. Along with desiring, willing, and feeling, 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 101 


thinking is one of our capacities. Not only thinking but all 
our abilities and modes of behavior relate to the essent. Very 
true. But the differentiation between being and thinking in- 
volves something more essential than a mere relation to the 
essent. The differentiation springs from an initial inner union 
between thinking and being itself. The formula "being and 
thinking" designates a differentiation that is demanded as it 
were by being itself. 

To be sure, such an inner union between thinking and be- 
ing cannot be inferred from what we have so far said about 
thinking. Why not? Because we have not yet gained an ade- 
quate concept of thinking. But where are we to find such a 
concept? 

In asking this question we are speaking as though such a 
thing as "logic" had not been with us for centuries. 

Logic is the science of thinking, the doctrine of the rules 
of thinking and the forms of thought. Moreover, it is the one 
philosophical discipline in which views of the world, the 
trends of Weltanschauung, play little or no part. Further- 
more logic passes as a secure and reliable science. It has 
taught the same thing from time immemorial. One logician, 
it is true, will modify the structure and order of the various 
traditional doctrines; another will introduce additions from 
epistemology; still another will provide a psychological under- 
pinning. But on the whole a gratifying agreement prevails. 
Logic relieves us of the need for any troublesome inquiry into 
the essence of thinking. 

And yet—we should like to raise one question. What does 
“logic” mean? The name is an abbreviation for epistémé 
logiké, the science of the logos. And logos here means state- 
ment. But logic is supposed to be the doctrine of thinking. 
Why then is it the science of statement? 

Why is thinking determined by statement? This is by no 
means self-evident. Previously we discussed “thinking” with- 
out reference to statement and discourse. Reflection on the 
essence of thinking is accordingly of a very particular kind 
when it is undertaken as reflection on logos and becomes 
logic. “Logic” and “the logical” are not simply the only pos- 
sible ways of defining thought. On the other hand, it was no 


102 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


accident that the doctrine of thinking should have become 
“logic.” 

Be that as it may, to invoke logic for purposes of delimiting 
the essence of thinking is a questionable approach if only 
because logic as such, and not merely some of its doctrines 
and theories, is questionable. For this reason “logic” must be 
put in quotes. We do so not because we wish to deny “the 
logical” (in the sense of straight thinking). In the service of 
thought we are trying precisely to penetrate the source from 
which the essence of thinking is determined, namely alétheia 
and physis, being as unconcealment, the very thing that has 
been lost by “logic.” 

Since when, we now ask, has there been this logic which 
still dominates our thinking and our discourse and which from 
an early day has contributed in large part to determining the 
grammatical view of language and the basic Western attitude 
toward language in general. When did the development of logic 
begin? It began when Greek philosophy was drawing to an 
end and becoming an affair of schools, organization, and tech- 
nique. It began when eon, the being of the essent, was repre- 
sented as idea and as such became the “object” of epistémé. 
Logic arose in the curriculum of the Platonic-Aristotelian 
schools. Logic is an invention of schoolteachers, not of phi- 
losophers. Where philosophers took it up it was always under 
more fundamental impulsions, not in the interest of logic. And 
it is no accident that the decisive efforts toward overcoming 
traditional logic were made by three of the greatest German 
thinkers, Leibniz, Kant, and Hegel. 

Logic was able to arise as an exposition of the formal struc- 
ture and rules of thought only after the division between 
being and thinking had been effected and indeed, only after 
it had been effected in a particular way and in a particular 
direction. Consequently logic itself and its history can never 
throw adequate light on the essence and origin of this separa- 
tion between being and thinking. Logic itself is in need of an 
explanation and foundation in regard to its own origin and its 
claim to provide the authoritative interpretation of thinking. 
The historical origin of logic as a school discipline and the 
particulars of its development do not concern us here. Still, 
we must consider the following questions: 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 103 


i. Why was it possible and indeed necessary that such a 
thing as "logic" should arise in the Platonic school? 

2. Why was this doctrine of thinking a doctrine of logos 
in the sense of statement? 

3. What was the basis of the steadily increasing prestige 
of the logical, ultimately expressed in these words of Hegel: 
"The logical (is) the absolute form of truth and, what is more, 
it is also the pure truth itself." (Enzykl. $ 19, WW, 6, 29.) 
It is in keeping with this dominant position of logic that Hegel 
consciously applied the name of "logic" to the discipline oth- 
erwise known as “metaphysics.” His “science of logic" has 
nothing in common with the usual textbook on logic. 

To think is intelligere in Latin. It is the business of the 
intellect. If we wish to combat intellectualism seriously, we 
must know our adversary, i.e. we must know that intellec- 
tualism is only an impoverished modern offshoot of a devel- 
opment long in the making, namely the position of priority 
gained by thought with the help of Western metaphysics. It 
is important to curtail the excrescences of present-day intel- 
lectualism. But this will not shake or even touch its position. 
The danger of a relapse into intellectualism persists precisely 
for those who wish to combat it. A campaign directed solely 
against present intellectualism lends a semblance of justifica- 
tion to those who advocate a proper use of the traditional in- 
tellect. They may not be intellectualists but they come from 
the same source. This spiritual conservativism, stemming 
partly from natural inertia and partly from conscious effort, 
has become the feeding ground of political reaction. The mis- 
interpretation of thought and the abuse to which it leads can 
be overcome only by authentic thinking that goes back to the 
roots—and by nothing else. The renewal of such thinking re- 
quires a return to the question of the essential relation of think- 
ing to being, and this means the unfolding of the question of 
being as such. To surpass the traditional logic does not mean 
elimination of thought and the domination of sheer feeling; it 
means more radical, stricter thinking, a thinking that is part 
and parcel of being. 

After this general exposition of the differentiation between 
being and thinking, we now ask more concretely: 


104 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


1. What is the nature of the original unity between being 
and thinking, between physis and logos? 

2. How did the original separation between logos and 
physis come about? 

3. How did a separate and distinct logos come to appear 
on the scene? 

4. How did the logos (the "logical") become the essence 
of thinking? 

5. How did this logos in the sense of reason and under- 
standing achieve domination over being in the beginning of 
Greek philosophy? 

In accordance with our six guiding principles (cf. above 
p. 80) we shall once more look into the historical, i.e. the 
essential, origins of this separation. If the separation between 
being and thinking was an essential, necessary separation, it 
must have been rooted in an original bond between them. 
Hence our inquiry into the origin of the separation is first 
and foremost an inquiry into the essential bond between 
thinking and being. 

In historical terms the question is: what was the nature of 
this bond in the crucial beginnings of Western philosophy? 
How was thinking understood in the beginning? That the 
Greek doctrine of thinking should have become a doctrine of 
logos, "logic," gives us a hint. Indeed, we encounter an origi- 
nal relationship between being, physis, and logos. We must 
merely free ourselves from the notion that originally and fun- 
damentally logos and legein signified thought, understanding, 
and reason. As long as we cling to this opinion and even go 
so far as to interpret logos in the light of logic as it later de- 
veloped, our attempt to rediscover the beginning of Greek 
philosophy can lead to nothing but absurdities. Moreover, 
where this view is held, it never becomes clear 1) how logos 
could ever have been separated from the being of the es- 
sent; 2) why this logos had to determine the essence of think- 
ing and bring it into opposition with being. 

Let us turn at once to the decisive point and ask: What do 
logos and legein mean if not thought and to think? Logos 
means the word, discourse, and legein means to speak, as in 
dia-logue, mono-logue. But originally logos did not mean 
speech, discourse. Its fundamental meaning stands in no di- 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 105 


rect relation to language. Lego, legein, Latin legere, is the 
same as the German word "lesen" (to gather, collect, read ): 
“Ahren lesen, Holz lesen, die Weinlese, die Auslese" (to glean, 
to gather wood, the vintage, the cream of the crop ); “ein Buch 
lesen” ( to read a book) is only a variant of “lesen” in the strict 
sense, which is: to put one thing with another, to bring to- 
gether, in short, to gather; but at the same time the one is 
marked off against the other. That is how the Greek mathe- 
maticians used the word. A coin collection is not a mere quan- 
tity assembled any which way. In the term “analogy” we ac- 
tually find both meanings side by side: the original meaning 
of “relation” and that of “speech,” “discourse.” But in con- 
nection with the word “analogy” we have almost ceased to 
think of “speaking,” while conversely, in connection with logos, 
the Greeks had not yet begun to think necessarily of “dis- 
course” and “speaking.” 

As an example of the original meaning of legein as to 
“gather,” we may take a passage in Homer, Odyssey XXIV 
106. Recognizing the slain suitors in the underworld, Aga- 
memnon says: “Amphimedon, what disaster has brought you 
here under the black earth, all picked men and years-mates? 
If one were to gather (lexaito) the best men of a polis, one 
could make no other choice.” (Cf. the English translation of 
W. H. D. Rouse, New York, Mentor, 1949, p. 248.) And in 
Physics, 0 1, 252 a 13, Aristotle says: taxis de pasa logos, “all 
order has a character of bringing together.” 

We shall not yet ask how the word passed from its origi- 
nal meaning, which had nothing to do with speech and words, 
to the signification of “to say” and “discourse.” Here we shall 
only recall that long after the noun logos had come to mean 
discourse and statement it retained its original meaning in the 
sense of "relation of the one to the other." 

In thus considering the basic meaning of logos, collection, 
to collect, we have not made much progress in clarifying the 
question: in what way were being and logos originally united 
for the Greeks, so that they could subsequently separate and 
for definite reasons had to do so? 

Reference to the basic meaning of logos can give us a hint 
only if we understand what “being” meant to the Greeks: 
namely physis. Not only have we tried to gain a general under- 


106 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


standing of being as the Greeks saw it; we have circumscribed 
it more and more closely through its delimitations over against 
becoming and appearance. 

Keeping all this in mind, we say: Being in the sense of 
physis is the power that emerges. As contrasted with becom- 
ing, it is permanence, permanent presence. Contrasted with 
appearance, it is appearing, manifest presence. 

What has logos (collection) to do with being interpreted 
in this way? But first we must ask: is there proof of any such 
connection between being and logos at the beginning of Greek 
philosophy? Yes, indeed. Again we go back to the two de- 
cisive thinkers, Parmenides and Heraclitus, and attempt once 
more to gain admittance into the Greek world, whose founda- 
tions, even though distorted and transposed, covered and con- 
cealed, still sustain our world. Precisely because we have em- 
barked on the great and long venture of demolishing a world 
that has grown old and of rebuilding it authentically anew, 
ie. historically, we must know the tradition. We must know 
more—i.e. our knowledge must be stricter and more binding 
—than all the epochs before us, even the most revolutionary. 
Only the most radical historical knowledge can make us aware 
of our extraordinary tasks and preserve us from a new wave 
of mere restoration and uncreative imitation. 

We begin our proof of the inner bond between logos and 
physis in the beginning of Western philosophy with an inter- 
pretation of Heraclitus. 

Of all the early Greek thinkers it is Heraclitus who, in the 
course of Western history, has suffered the most transforma- 
tion along un-Greek lines, and yet who in recent years has pro- 
vided the strongest impulse toward rediscovery of the authen- 
tic Greek spirit. Hegel and Hólderlin were both under the 
great and fruitful spell of Heraclitus, but with the difference 
that Hegel looked backward and drew a line under the past 
while Hölderlin looked forward and opened up the way to 
the future. Still different was Nietzsche's relation to Heraclitus. 
Nietzsche was a victim of the current (and false) opposition 
between Parmenides and Heraclitus. This is one of the main 
reasons why in his metaphysics he did not find his way to the 
decisive question, even though he understood the great age 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 107 


of Greek beginnings with a depth that was surpassed only by 
Hölderlin. 

Christianity was responsible for the misinterpretation of 
Heraclitus. It was begun by the Old Church Fathers. Hegel 
was still in this tradition. Heraclitus’ doctrine of the logos* 
was regarded as the forerunner of the logos that figures in the 
New Testament—in the prologue to the Gospel of St. John. 
The logos is Christ. But Heraclitus already spoke of the logos 
and this meant that the Greeks had reached the very gates of 
the absolute truth, namely the revealed truth of Christianity. 
In a book that came to me only a few days ago I read: “The 
real appearance of truth in the form of the God-man set the 
seal on the Greeks’ philosophical insight concerning the rule 
of the logos over all existence. This confirmation and seal es- 
tablish the classicism of Greek philosophy.” 

According to this widespread interpretation of history the 
Greeks are the classics of philosophy, because they were not 
yet full-grown Christian theologians. But we shall first listen 
to Heraclitus himself before deciding what to think of him as 
a forerunner of Christianity. 

We begin with two fragments in which Heraclitus speaks 
expressly of the logos. In our version we intentionally leave 
the crucial word logos untranslated, for we hope to gain its 
meaning from the context. 


Fragment 1: But while the logos remains always this, 
men remain uncomprehending (axynetoi), both before 
they have heard and just after they have heard. For ev- 
erything becomes essent in accordance with this logos, 
kata ton logon tonde; but they (men) resemble those 
who have never in their experience ventured anything, 
although they try their hand at words and works such as 
I perform, separating all things kata physin, according to 
being, and explaining how they behave. As to the other 
men (the other men as they all are, hoi polloi), from 
them what they actually do when awake is hidden, just 
as what they have done in sleep is hidden from them 
afterward. 


* “Logos” is italic where Heidegger used Greek, roman where he 
transliterated. R.M. 


108 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


Fragment 2: Therefore it is necessary to follow it, i.e. 
to adhere to togetherness in the essent; but though the 
logos is this togetherness in the essent, the many live as 
though each had his own understanding (opinion). 


What do these two fragments tell us? 

It is said that 1) permanence and endurance are charac- 
teristic of the logos; 2) it is togetherness in the essent, the to- 
getherness of all essents, that which gathers; 3) everything 
that happens, i.e. that comes into being, stands there in ac- 
cordance with this permanent togetherness; this is the domi- 
nant power. 

What is said here of logos corresponds exactly to the actual 
meaning of the word "collection" (Sammlung). But just as 
the German word means 1) collecting and 2) collectedness, 
so logos means here collecting collectedness, the primal gath- 
ering principle. Logos here signifies neither meaning nor word 
nor doctrine, and surely not “meaning of a doctrine"; it means: 
the original collecting collectedness which is in itself per- 
manently dominant. 

In Fragment 1, to be sure, tlie context seems to suggest an 
interpretation in the sense of word and discourse, and even 
to demand it as the only possible explanation; for it speaks 
of the "hearing" of men. There is a fragment (5o) in which 
this connection between logos and "hearing" is directly ex- 
pressed: “If you have heard not me but the logos, then it is 
wise to say accordingly: all is one." Here the logos is as- 
suredly taken as something “audible.” What else can this 
word mean but statement, discourse, word? Particularly since 
at Heraclitus’ time legein was already current in the meaning 
of "to speak." 

Heraclitus himself says (Fragment 73): ^We must not act 
and speak as if asleep." Here legein in opposition to poiein 
can obviously mean nothing other than to speak. And never- 
theless, in the crucial passages cited above (Fragments 1 and 
2) logos means not discourse and not word. Fragment 5o, 
which seems particularly to argue for logos as discourse, sug- 
gests an entirely different perspective if properly interpreted. 

In order to see and understand what logos means in the 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 109 


sense of "permanent gathering" we must take a closer look 
at the context of the first two fragments. 

In confronting the logos, men are uncomprehending 
(axynetoi)—they do not comprehend the logos. Heraclitus 
uses this word frequently (see particularly Fragment 34). It 
is the negation of syniémi which signifies “bring together": 
axynetoi; that is to say, men are those who do not bring together 
e « . What do they not bring together? the logos, that which 
is permanently together, collectedness. Men are those who 
do not bring it together, who do not comprehend it, who do 
not compass it in one, and this regardless of whether or not 
they have heard it. The next sentence makes the meaning 
clear. Men do not penetrate to the logos even if they attempt 
to do so with words, epea. Here indeed word and discourse 
are mentioned, but they are differentiated from, and even op- 
posed to, logos. Heraclitus means to say: Men have hearing, 
they hear words, but in this hearing, they cannot “heed,” i.e. 
follow what is not audible like words, what is not a discourse, 
a speaking, but indeed the logos. Thus, properly understood, 
Fragment 50 proves the exact opposite of what is read into 
it. It says: do not attach importance to words but heed the 
logos. Because logos and legein already signified discourse 
and to speak, but since these are not the essence of the logos, 
logos here is opposed to epea, discourse. Correspondingly, the 
hearing that is a following (Hórig-sein) is contrasted with 
mere hearing. Mere hearing scatters and diffuses itself in what 
is commonly believed and said, in hearsay, in doxa, appear- 
ance. True hearing has nothing to do with ear and mouth, 
but means: to follow the logos and what it is, namely the col- 
lectedness of the essent itself. We can hear truly only if we 
are followers. But this has nothing to do with the lobes of our 
ears. The man who is no follower is removed and excluded 
from the logos from the start, regardless of whether he has 
heard with his ears or not yet heard. Those who merely hear 
by listening around and assembling rumors are and remain 
the axynetoi, the uncomprehending. They are described in 
Fragment 34: "Those who do not bring together the perma- 
nent togetherness hear but resemble the deaf." They hear 
words and speeches but they are closed to what they should 
give heed to. As the proverb says, they are: Present yet absent. 


110 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


But in regard to what are most men present and at the same 
time absent? Fragment 72 gives the answer: “For what they 
associate with most closely, the logos, to it they turn their back; 
and what they encounter every day seems strange to them." 

Men are forever with the logos, yet forever removed from 
it, absent though present; thus they are the axynetoi, those who 
do not comprehend. 

Wherein consists then men's inability to grasp and com- 
prehend, when they hear words but do not grasp the logos? 
What is it that they are with and yet absent from? Men have 
always to do with being in that they are always dealing with 
essents; it is alien to them in that they turn away from being, 
because they do not grasp it but suppose that essents are only 
essents and nothing more. They are awake (in relation to the 
essent) and yet being is hidden from them. They sleep and 
even their actions pass from them. They thrash about amid 
the essents, always supposing that what is most tangible is 
what they must grasp, and thus each man grasps what is 
closest to him. The one holds to this, the other to that, each 
man's opinion (Sinn) hinges on his own (eigen ); it is opin- 
ionatedness (Eigen-sinn). This opinionatedness, this obsti- 
nacy, prevents them from reaching out to what is gathered 
together in itself, makes it impossible for them to be followers 
( Horige ) and to hear ( hören ) accordingly. 

Logos is the steady gathering, the intrinsic togetherness of 
the essent, i.e. being. Therefore in Fragment 1 kata ton logon 
means the same as kata physin. Physis and logos are the same. 
Logos characterizes being in a new and yet old respect: that 
which is, which stands straight and distinct in itself, is at the 
same time gathered togetherness in itself and by itself, and 
maintains itself in such togetherness. Eon, beingness, is es- 
sentially xynon, collected presence; xynon does not mean the 
“universal” but that which in itself collects all things and holds 
them together. According to Fragment 114, such a xynon is, 
for example, the nomos for the polis, the statute that consti- 
tutes or puts together, the inner structure of the polis, not a 
universal, not something that hovers over all and touches none, 
but the original unifying unity of what tends apart. The opin- 
ionatedness, idia phronésis, for which the logos is sealed, at- 
taches itself only to the one or the other side and supposes 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 111 


that it has captured the truth. Fragment 103 says: “Gathered 
together, the beginning and end of the circle are the same." 
It would be absurd to interpret xynon here as the "universal." 

To the opinionated life is only life; death is death and only 
death. But life's being is also death. Everything that enters 
into life also begins to die, to go toward its death, and death 
is at the same time life. Heraclitus says in Fragment 8: “Op- 
posites move back and forth, the one to the other; from out 
of themselves they gather themselves." The conflict of the 
opposites is a gathering, rooted in togetherness, it is logos. 
The being of the essents is the supreme radiance, i.e. the 
greatest beauty, that which is most permanent in itself. What 
the Greeks meant by “beauty” was restraint. The gathering 
of the supreme antagonism is polemos, struggle (as we have 
seen above) in the sense of setting apart ( Aus-einander- 
setzung ). For us moderns, on the contrary, the beautiful is 
what reposes and relaxes; it is intended for enjoyment and 
art is a matter for pastry cooks. It makes no essential differ- 
ence whether the enjoyment of art serves to satisfy the sensi- 
bilities of the connoisseur and esthete or to provide moral 
edification. For the Greeks on and kalon meant the same 
thing (presence was pure radiance). The esthetic view is 
very different; it is as old as logic. For esthetics art is repre- 
sentation of the beautiful in the sense of the pleasing, the 
pleasant. But art is disclosure of the being of the essent. On 
the strength of a recaptured, pristine, relation to being we 
must provide the word “art” with a new content. 

We conclude our characterization of the logos as Hera- 
clitus thought it, with two points that still preserve their full 
force. 

1. There can be true speaking and hearing only if they 
are directed in advance toward being, the logos. Only where 
the logos discloses itself does the phonetic sound become a 
word. Only where the being of the essent is heard does a mere 
casual listening become a hearing. But those who do not grasp 
the logos, akousai ouk epistamenoi oud’ eipein, “are not able 
to hear or to speak" (Fragment 19). They cannot bring their 
being-there to stand in the being of the essent. Only those 
who can do so master the word; these are the poets and think- 
ers. The others stagger about in their obstinacy and ignorance. 


112 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


They recognize only what runs across their path, what pleases 
them and is familiar to them. They are like dogs: kynes gar kai 
bauzousin hin an me gignoskosi, "for the dogs bark at every- 
one they do not know" (Fragment 97). They are donkeys: 
onous syrmat’ an helesthai mallon & chryson. “Donkeys prefer 
chaff to gold" (Fragment 9). Always and everywhere they 
deal with essents. But being remains hidden from them. Be- 
ing is not tangible, it cannot be heard with the ears or smelled. 
Being is anything but vapor and smoke: ei panta ta onta 
kapnos genoito, rhines an diagnoen. “If all essents went up 
in smoke, it is the noses that would differentiate and appre- 
hend them" (Fragment 7). 

2. Because being as logos is basic gathering, not mass and 
turmoil in which everything has as much or as little value as 
everything else, rank and domination are implicit in being. If 
being is to disclose itself, it must itself have and maintain a 
rank. That is why Heraclitus spoke of the many as dogs and 
donkeys. This attitude was an essential part of Greek being- 
there. Nowadays a little too much fuss is sometimes made over 
the Greek polis. If one is going to concern oneself with the 
polis, this aspect should not be forgotten, or else the whole 
idea becomes insignificant and sentimental What has the 
higher rank is the stronger. Therefore being, the logos as gath- 
ering and harmony, is not easily accessible and not accessible 
to all in the same form; unlike the harmony that is mere com- 
promise, destruction of tension, flattening, it is hidden: har- 
monié aphanés phanéres kreitton, “the harmony that does not 
(immediately and easily) show itself is mightier than that 
which is (at all times) manifest” (Fragment 54). 

Because being is logos, harmonia, alétheia, physis, phain- 
esthai, it does not show itself as one pleases. The true is not 
for every man but only for the strong. It is with a view to 
this inner superiority and hiddenness of being that Heraclitus 
spoke those strange words which, because they are seemingly 
so un-Greek, bear witness to the Greek experience of the being 
of the essent: all hosper sarma eiké kechumenon ho kallistos 
kosmos. "The most beautiful world is like a heap of rubble, 
tossed down in confusion" (Fragment 124). 

Sarma is the antithesis of logos, that which is merely tossed 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 113 


down over against that which stands in itself, muddle over 
against togetherness, unbeing over against being. 

The popular interpretation of Heraclitus tends to sum up 
his philosophy in the dictum panta rhei, "everything flows." 
If these words stem from Heraclitus to begin with, they do 
not mean that everything is mere continuous and evanescent 
change, pure impermanence; no, they mean that the essent 
as a whole, in its being, is hurled back and forth from one op- 
position to another; being is the gathering of this conflict and 
unrest. 

If we take the basic meaning of logos as gathering and to- 
getherness, we must note the following: 

Gathering is never a mere driving-together and heaping-up. 
It maintains in a common bond the conflicting and that which 
tends apart. It does not let them fall into haphazard disper- 
sion. In thus maintaining a bond, the logos has the character 
of permeating power, of physis. It does not let what it holds 
in its power dissolve into an empty freedom from opposition, 
but by uniting the opposites maintains the full sharpness of 
their tension. 

Here is the place to return briefly to the Christian concept 
of the logos, particularly as it appears in the New Testament. 
For a more detailed exposition we should have to distinguish 
between the Synoptic Gospels and the Gospel of St. John. 
But in principle we may say this: logos in the New Testament 
does not, as in Heraclitus, mean the being of the essent, the 
gathering together of the conflicting; it means one particular 
essent, namely the son of God. And specifically it refers to 
him in the role of mediator between God and men. This New 
Testament notion of the logos is that of the Jewish philosophy 
of religion developed by Philo whose doctrine of creation at- 
tributes to the logos the function of mesités, the mediator. 
How so? Because in the Greek translation of the Old Testa- 
ment (Septuagint) logos signifies the word, and what is more, 
the ^word" in the definite meaning of command and com- 
mandment; hoi deka logoi are the ten commandments of God 
(decalogue). Thus logos signifies the kéryx, the angelos, the 
herald, the messenger, who hands down commands and com- 
mandments; logos tou staurou is the word of the cross. The 
proclamation of the cross is Christ himself; he is the logos of 


114 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


redemption, of eternal life, logos zóes. A whole world sepa- 
rates all this from Heraclitus. 

We have attempted to set forth the essential bond between 
logos and physis—for on the basis of this unity we mean to 
show the inner necessity and possibility of the separation 
between them. 

But at this point an objection seems to arise against this 
characterization of the Heraclitean logos: if logos and being 
are so intimately and essentially linked, how, one wonders, 
can this unity and identity of physis and logos give rise to the 
opposition between being and thought as logos? Assuredly 
this is a question, a question which we do not mean to make 
too easy for ourselves, although there is a great temptation 
to do so. For the present we may only say this: If the unity 
of physis and logos is so fundamental, the separation between 
them must be just as much so. If in addition this distinction 
between being and thinking is different in kind and direction 
from the preceding distinctions, it must also have arisen in a 
different way. Therefore, just as we have striven to keep our 
interpretation of logos free from all later falsifications and to 
understand it through the essence of physis, we must also en- 
deavor to understand the separation of physis and logos in a 
purely Greek way, i.e. on the basis of physis and logos. For in 
considering the separation and opposition of physis and logos, 
of being and thinking, we are exposed to an almost more per- 
sistent danger of modern falsification than in considering their 
unity. How so? 

In defining the opposition between being and thinking, we 
move in a familiar schema. Being is the objective, the object. 
Thinking is the subjective, the subject. The relation of think- 
ing to being is that of subject to object. The Greeks, it is sup- 
posed, conceived this relation in an extremely primitive way, 
for this was the beginning of philosophy and they lacked train- 
ing in epistemology. A further supposition is that there is 
nothing in the opposition between being and thinking to de- 
mand reflection. And yet we must inquire. 

What is the essential law governing the separation of physis 
and logos? In order to disclose this law we must conceive the 
bond between logos and physis, their unity, more sharply 
than before. This we shall attempt to do with the help of Par- 


118 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


particularity of its belonging to being as dominant appearing. 
And since apprehension—accepting apprehension of what 
shows itself—belongs to such appearing, it may be presumed 
that this is precisely what determines the essence of being- 
human. Thus, in interpreting Parmenides proposition, we 
must not read some later idea, and above all not a present-day 
idea, of being-human into it. Quite on the contrary, it is the 
proposition itself that must tell us how, according to it, and 
that is, according to the essence of being, being-human is 
determined. 

According to Heraclitus what man is is first manifested 
(edeixe, shows itself) in polemos, in the separation of gods 
and men, in the irruption of being itself. For philosophy what 
man is is not written somewhere in heaven. We must rather 
say: 


1. The determination of the essence of man is never an 
answer but essentially a question. 

2. The asking of this question and the decision in this ques- 
tion are historical, and not merely in a general sense; no, this 
question is the very essence of history. 

3. The question of what man is must always be taken in its 
essential bond with the question of how it stands with being. 
The question of man is not an anthropological question but a 
historically meta-physical question. [The question cannot be 
adequately asked in the domain of traditional metaphysics 
which remains essentially “physics.”] 


Consequently we must not misinterpret nous and noein in 
this proposition of Parmenides according to a concept of man 
supplied by us, but must learn that man's being is determined 
by the essential belonging-together of being and apprehension. 

What is man where being and apprehension reign? The be- 
ginning of Fragment 6, which is already known to us, gives 
us the answer: Chré to legein te noein teon emmenai. Both are 
needful, the legein as well as the apprehension—of the essent 
in its being. 

Noein may not yet be interpreted as thinking. Nor does it 
suffice to consider it as Vernehmung if we take the usual un- 
witting view of "Vernehmung" as an activity of man, of a 
man whom we conceive in accordance with a pale and empty 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 119 


biology and psychology or epistemology. And this occurs even 
when we do not specifically invoke such conceptions. 

Apprehension, as Parmenides says, is not a faculty belong- 
ing to a man already defined; apprehension is rather a process 
in which man first enters into history as a being, an essent, 
ie. (in the literal sense) comes into being. 

Apprehension is not a function that man has as an attribute, 
but rather the other way around: apprehension is the hap- 
pening that has man. That is why Parmenides always speaks 
simply of noein, of apprehension. What is accomplished in 
this maxim is nothing less than the knowing appearance of 
man as historical being (as the historical custodian of being). 
This, for the West, is the crucial definition of being-human, 
and at the same time it embodies an essential characterization 
of being. The separation between being and being-human 
comes to light in their togetherness. We can no longer discern 
this separation through the pale and empty dichotomy of “be- 
ing and thinking" which lost its roots hundreds of years ago, 
unless we go back to its beginnings. 

The mode and direction of the opposition between being 
and thinking are so unique because it is here that man comes 
face to face with being. This event marks the knowing emer- 
gence of man as the historical being. It is only after man be- 
came known as the historical essent that he was "defined" in 
a concept, namely as the zdion logon echon, the rational ani- 
mal. In this definition of man the logos occurs, but in a totally 
unrecognizable form and in very odd company. 

This definition of man is fundamentally a zoological one. 
The zdion of this zoology is in many respects questionable. 
But the Western doctrine of man—all psychology, ethics, the- 
ory of knowledge and anthropology—has been filled into the 
frame of this definition. For years we have been thrashing 
around in a confused mixture of ideas and concepts drawn 
from these disciplines. 

But since the definition of man supporting the whole struc- 
ture was in itself a degeneration—not to mention the inter- 
pretation that was put on it later—we shall see nothing of 
what is said, and of what happens in Parmenides’ maxim, as 
long as we think and inquire along the lines laid down by 
this definition. 


120 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


But the current conception of man in all its variants is only 
one of the barriers that cut us off from the realm where the 
manifestation of being-human first occurred and was first 
stabilized. The other barrier is that even the so-called ques- 
tion concerning man remains alien to us. 

To be sure, there are books today entitled: “What is man?" 
But the title merely stands in letters on the cover. There is 
no questioning. Not only because people have been so busy 
writing books that they have forgotten how to question, but 
because the writers already possess an answer and what is 
more an answer that forbids questioning. If a man believes 
the propositions of Catholic dogma, that is his individual con- 
cern; we shall not discuss it here. But how can we be expected 
to take a man seriously who writes “What is man?" on the 
cover of his book although he does not inquire, because he 
is unwilling and unable to inquire. And when the Frankfurter 
Zeitung, among others, praises such a book, which questions 
merely on its cover, as "an extraordinary, magnificent and 
courageous work," even the blindest among us know where 
we stand. 

Why do I speak of such irrelevancies in connection with 
the exegesis of Parmenides’ dictum? In itself this sort of serib- 
bling is unimportant and insignificant. What is not unimpor- 
tant is the paralysis of all passion for questioning that has 
long been with us. The consequence of this paralysis is that 
all standards and perspectives have been confused and that 
most men have ceased to know where and between what the 
crucial decisions must be made, if a sharp and original his- 
torical knowledge is to be combined with greatness of his- 
torical will. Such hints as we have thrown out can only sug- 
gest how far questioning as a fundamental element of historical 
being has receded from us. But we have even lost our under- 
standing for the question. For this reason let us set forth the 
essential points that must be borne in mind if we are to think 
through the ensuing argument: 

1. The determination of the essence of man is never an 
answer but essentially a question. 

2. The asking of this question is historical in the funda- 
mental sense that this questioning first creates history. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 121 


3. This is so because the question as to what man is can 
only be asked as part of the inquiry about being. 

4. Only where being discloses itself in questioning does his- 
tory happen and with it the being of man, by virtue of which 
he ventures to set himself apart from the essent as such and 
contend (auseinandersetzen ) with it. 

5. It is questioning contending that first brings man back 
to the essent that he himself is and must be. 

6. Only as a questioning, historical being does man come 
to himself; only as such is he a self. Man's selfhood means 
this: he must transform the being that discloses itself to him 
into history and bring himself to stand in it. Selfhood does not 
mean that he is primarily an “ego” and an individual. This he 
is no more than he is a we, a community. 

7. Because man as a historical being is himself, the ques- 
tion about his own being must be reformulated. Rather than 
“What is man?" we should say “Who is man?" 

What is expressed. in Parmenides maxim is a definition of 
the essence of man from out of the essence of being itself. 

We still do not know how the essence of man is here de- 
fined. It was first necessary to mark off the realm in which 
Parmenides speaks and which in speaking he helps to dis- 
close. But these general pointers do not suffice to free us from 
the current notions of man and the current concepts in which 
he is defined. In order to understand the maxim, in order to 
grasp its truth, we must gain some positive idea of Greek 
being-there and Greek being. 

From the Heraclitean fragment several times quoted we 
know that the separation between gods and men took place 
only in polemos, in the conflict which sets (being) apart. It 
is only such conflict that edeixe, that shows, that brings forth 
gods and men in their being. We do not learn who man is by 
learned definitions; we learn it only when man contends with 
the essent, striving to bring it into its being, i.e. into limit and 
form, that is to say when he projects something new (not yet 
present), when he creates original poetry, when he builds 
poetically. 

The thinking of Parmenides and Heraclitus was still poetic, 
which in this case means philosophical and not scientific. But 


122 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


because in this poetic thinking the thinking has priority, the 
thought about man's being follows its own direction and pro- 
portions. This poetic thinking forms a body with the contrary 
aspect, the thinking poetry of the Creeks and particularly that 
poetry in which the being and (closely related) being-there 
of the Greeks was in the truest sense created: the tragedy. Let 
us consult the tragedy for a better understanding of Greek po- 
etic philosophy. 

We are seeking to understand the origin of the differentia- 
tion between "being and thinking." This differentiation is a 
name for the fundamental attitude of the Western spirit. In 
accordance with this attitude, being is defined from the stand- 
point of thinking and reason. This is true even where the West- 
ern spirit shuns the domination of reason by seeking the “ir- 
rational” and “alogical.” 

In our quest for the source of the differentiation between 
"being and thinking" we have come across Parmenides' 
maxim: £o gar auto noein estin te kai einai. According to the 
usual translation and interpretation it means: Thinking and 
being are the same. 

We may call this maxim the guiding principle of Western 
philosophy, but only if we append this note to it: 

The maxim became the guiding principle of Western phi- 
losophy only when it ceased to be understood because its 
original truth could not be held fast. The falling away from 
the truth of this maxim began with the Greeks themselves, 
immediately after Parmenides. Men can retain basic truths 
of such magnitude only by raising them continuously to a 
still more original unfolding; not merely by applying them 
and invoking their authority. The original remains original 
only if it never loses the possibility of being what it is: origin 
as emergence (from the concealment of the essence). We are 
trying to regain the basic and original truth of the maxim. We 
have given the first hint of a different interpretation by our 
translation. The maxim does not say: “Thinking and being 
are the same.” It says: “There is a reciprocal bond between 
apprehension and being.” 

But what does this mean? 

In one way or another it is man who speaks in this maxim. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 123 


Hence it is almost inevitable that the prevailing idea of man 
should be carried into the maxim. 

But this produces a falsification of the essence of man as 
experienced by the Greeks, according either to the Christian 
or to the modern concept of man, or else according to a pale 
and diluted mixture of the two. 

But this misinterpretation in the direction of a non-Greek 
notion of man is the lesser evil. 

The real catastrophe is to be sought in a total failure to 
understand the truth of the maxim. 

For in this maxim the crucial definition of being-human 
was accomplished. Hence in interpreting it we must avoid not 
only all inappropriate ideas of man but all ideas of man what- 
soever. We must attempt to hear only what is said. 

But because we are inexperienced at such hearing, and be- 
cause moreover our ears are full of things that prevent us 
from hearing properly, it has been necessary to state the con- 
ditions for a proper inquiry as to who man is—though we have 
done little more than list them. 

And because the definition of being-human effected by 
Parmenides is strange and hard to approach directly, we shall 
first seek help and counsel by consulting the poetic project of 
being-human among the Greeks. 

We read the first chorus from the Antigone of Sophocles 
(lines 332—75). First we listen to the Greek words in order 
to get some of the sound into our ears. The translation runs: 


There is much that is strange, but nothing 
that surpasses man in strangeness. 
He sets sail on the frothing waters 
amid the south winds of winter 
tacking through the mountains 

and furious chasms of the waves. 
He wearies even the noblest 

of the gods, the Earth, 
indestructible and untiring, 
overturning her from year to year, 
driving the plows this way and that 
with horses. 


124 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


And man, pondering and plotting, 

snares the light-gliding birds 

and hunts the beasts of the wilderness 

and the native creatures of the sea. 

With guile he overpowers the beast 

that roams the mountains by night as by day, 
he yokes the hirsute neck of the stallion 

and the undaunted bull. 


And he has found his way 

to the resonance of the word, 

and to wind-swift all-understanding, 
and to the courage of rule over cities. 
He has considered also how to flee 
from exposure to the arrows 

of unpropitious weather and frost. 


Everywhere journeying, inexperienced and without issue, 
he comes to nothingness. 

Through no flight can he resist 

the one assault of death, 

even if he has succeeded in cleverly evading 

painful sickness. 


Clever indeed, mastering 

the ways of skill beyond all hope, 

he sometimes accomplishes evil, 

sometimes achieves brave deeds. 

He wends his way between the laws of the earth 
and the adjured justice of the gods. 

Rising high above his place, 

he who for the sake of adventure takes 

the nonessent for essent loses 

his place in the end. 


May such a man never frequent my hearth; 
May my mind never share the presumption 
of him who does this. 


The following commentary is necessarily inadequate, if only 
because it cannot be built up from the poet's entire work or 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 125 


even from the whole tragedy. Here I shall not be able to go 
into the choice of readings or the changes that have been 
made in the text. Our interpretation falls into three phases, 
in each of which we shall consider the whole poem from a dif- 
ferent point of view. 

In the first phase we shall set forth the intrinsic meaning 
of the poem, that which sustains the edifice of words and 
rises above it. 

In the second phase we pass through the whole sequence 
of strophes and antistrophes and delimit the area that is 
opened up by the poem. 

In the third phase we attempt to take our stand in the center 
of the poem, with a view to judging who man is according 
to this poetic discourse. 

First phase. We seek that which sustains the whole and 
towers above it. Actually we have not far to seek. It is three- 
fold; it bursts upon us like a triple assault, shattering at the 
very outset all everyday standards of questioning and defi- 
nition. 

The first is the beginning: 


There is much that is strange, but nothing 
that surpasses man in strangeness. 


In these first two verses the poet anticipates. He will spend 
the rest of the poem in catching up with himself. Man, in one 
word, is deinotaton, the strangest. This one word encom- 
passes the extreme limits and abrupt abysses of his being. 
'This aspect of the ultimate and abysmal can never be dis- 
cerned through the mere description that establishes data, 
even though thousands of eyes should examine man, search- 
ing for attributes and states. Such being is disclosed only to 
poetic insight. We find no portrayal of existing specimens of 
man; nor do we find any sort of blind and fatuous inflation 
of human essence from below, inspired by peevish yearning 
for some unattained glory; here there is no suggestion of a 
pre-eminent personality. Among the Greeks there were no 
personalities (and for this reason no supra-personality). Man 
is to deinotaton, the strangest of the strange. Here we must 
anticipate an explanation of the Greek word deinon and of our 
translation. This calls for a tacit glance over the whole poem, 


126 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


which alone can provide an appropriate interpretation of the 
first two verses. The Greek word deinon has the strange am- 
biguity with which Greek discourse cuts across the contend- 
ing separations ( Aus-einander-setzungen ) of being. 

On the one hand deinon means the terrible, but not in the 
sense of petty terrors, and above all not in the decadent, in- 
sipid, and useless sense that the word has taken on today, in 
such locutions as “terribly cute.” The deinon is the terrible in 
the sense of the overpowering power which compels panic 
fear, true fear; and in equal measure it is the collected, silent 
awe that vibrates with its own rhythm. The mighty, the over- 
powering is the essential character of power itself. Where it 
irrupts, it can hold its overpowering power in check. Yet this 
does not make it more innocuous, but still more terrible and 
remote. 

But on the other hand deinon means the powerful in the 
sense of one who uses power, who not only disposes of power 
(Gewalt) but is violent ( gewalt-tátig) insofar as the use of 
power is the basic trait not only of his action but also of his 
being-there. Here we use the word violence in an essential 
sense extending beyond the common usage of the word, as 
mere arbitrary brutality. In this common usage violence is 
seen from the standpoint of a realm which draws its standards 
from conventional compromise and mutual aid, and which 
accordingly disparages all violence as a disturbance of the 
peace. 

The essent as a whole, seen as power, is the overpowering, 
deinon in the first sense. Man is deinon, first because he re- 
mains exposed within this overpowering power, because by 
his essence he belongs to being. But at the same time man is 
deinon because he is the violent one in the sense designated 
above. (He gathers the power and brings it to manifestness. ) 
Man is the violent one, not aside from and along with other 
attributes but solely in the sense that in his fundamental vio- 
lence ( Gewalt-titigkeit ) he uses power ( Gewalt ) against the 
overpowering ( Uberwiltigende ). Because he is twice deinon 
in a sense that is originally one, he is to deinotaton, the most 
powerful: violent in the midst of the overpowering. 

But why do we translate deinon as “strange” ( unheimlich y? 
Not in order to hide or attenuate the meaning of powerful, 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 127 


overpowering, violent; quite on the contrary. Because this 
deinon is meant as the supreme limit and link of man's being, 
the essence of the being thus defined should from the first be 
seen in its crucial aspect. But, in that case, is the designation 
of the powerful as the strange and uncanny ( unheimlich ) not 
a posterior notion derived from the impression that the power- 
ful makes on us, whereas the essential here is to understand 
the deinon as what it intrinsically is? That is so, but we are not 
taking the strange in the sense of an impression on our states 
of feeling. 

We are taking the strange, the uncanny (das Unheimliche ), 
as that which casts us out of the “homely,” i.e. the customary, 
familiar, secure. The unhomely (Unheimische) prevents us 
from making ourselves at home and therein it is overpower- 
ing. But man is the strangest of all, not only because he passes 
his life amid the strange understood in this sense but because 
he departs from his customary, familiar limits, because he is 
the violent one, who, tending toward the strange in the sense 
of the overpowering, surpasses the limit of the familiar (das 
Heimische ). 

To understand the full implication of these words of the 
chorus, we must bear this in mind: to say that man is to 
deinotaton, the strangest of all, is not to impute a particular 
attribute to man, as though he were also something else; no, 
the verse says that to be the strangest of all is the basic trait 
of the human essence, within which all other traits must find 
their place. In calling man “the strangest of all” it gives the 
authentic Greek definition of man. We shall fully appreciate 
this phenomenon of strangeness only if we experience the 
power of appearance and the struggle with it as an essential 
part of being-there. 

The second passage that sustains the poetic edifice and 
rises above it is to be found in line 360, in the middle of the 
second strophe: Pantoporos aporos ep'ouden erchetai. “Every- 
where journeying, inexperienced and without issue, he comes 
to nothingness." The essential words are pantoporos aporos. 
The word poros means: passage through . . . , transition to 

. , path. Everywhere man makes himself a path; he ven- 
tures into all realms of the essent, of the overpowering power, 
and in so doing he is flung out of all paths. Herein is dis- 


128 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


closed the entire strangeness of this strangest of all creatures: 
not only that he tries the essent in the whole of its strange- 
ness, not only that in so doing he is a violent one striving be- 
yond his familiar sphere. No, beyond all this he becomes the 
strangest of all beings because, without issue on all paths, he 
is cast out of every relation to the familiar and befallen by ata, 
ruin, catastrophe. 

It is not hard to see that this pantoporos aporos contains an 
interpretation of deinotaton. 

The interpretation is completed in the third salient phrase, 
line 370: hypsipolis apolis. In construction it is similar to 
pantoporos aporos, and its situation in the middle of the antis- 
trophe presents another parallel. But it moves in a different 
direction. It speaks not of poros but of polis; not of the paths 
to all the realms of the essent but of the foundation and scene 
of man's being-there, the point at which all these paths meet, 
the polis. Polis is usually translated as city or city-state. This 
does not capture the full meaning. Polis means, rather, the 
place, the there, wherein and as which historical being-there 
is. The polis is the historical place, the there in which, out of 
which, and for which history happens. To this place and scene 
of history belong the gods, the temples, the priests, the festi- 
vals, the games, the poets, the thinkers, the ruler, the council 
of elders, the assembly of the people, the army and the fleet. 
All this does not first belong to the polis, does not become 
political by entering into a relation with a statesman and a 
general and the business of the state. No, it is political, i.e. 
at the site of history, provided there be (for example) poets 
alone, but then really poets, priests alone, but then really 
priests, rulers alone, but then really rulers. Be, but this means: 
as violent men to use power, to become pre-eminent in his- 
torical being as creators, as men of action. Pre-eminent in the 
historical place, they become at the same time apolis, without 
city and place, lonely, strange, and alien, without issue amid 
the essent as a whole, at the same time without statute and 
limit, without structure and order, because they themselves 
as creators must first create all this. 

The first phase shows us the inner design of the essence 
of the strangest of all beings, the realms and scope of his 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 129 


power and his destiny. Now we go back to the beginning and 
attempt the second phase of interpretation. 

The second phase. In the light of what has been said above 
we now follow the sequence of the strophes and hear how 
the being of man, the strangest of beings, unfolds. We shall 
try to determine when the deinon is meant in the first sense, 
how the deinon in the second sense emerges concurrently, and 
how, in the reciprocal relation between the two, the being 
of the strangest being is built up before us in its essential form. 

The first strophe names the sea and the earth, each of them 
overpowering (deinon) in its way. It does not speak of them 
in the manner of us moderns who experience them as mere 
geographical and geological phenomena and then, as though 
by an afterthought, brush them over with a few faint and 
fleeting emotions. Here “sea” is said as though for the first 
time; the poet speaks of the wintry waves that the sea creates 
as it unceasingly tears open its own depths and unceasingly 
flings itself into them. Immediately after the main, guiding 
statement of the first verses, the song begins, hard and power- 
ful, with touto kai polion. Man embarks on the groundless 
deep, forsaking the solid land. He sets sail not upon bright, 
smooth waters but amid the storms of winter. The account 
of this departure concerts with the movement of the prosody; 
the word chorei in line 336 is situated at the point where the 
meter shifts: chdrei, he abandons the place, he starts out— 
and ventures into the preponderant power of the placeless 
waves. The word stands like a pillar in the edifice of these 
verses. 

But woven into one with this violent excursion ( Aufbruch ) 
upon the overpowering sea is the never-resting incursion ( Ein- 
bruch ) into the indestructible power of the earth. Here the 
earth is the highest of the gods. Violently, with acts of power 
(gewalt-tátig) man disturbs the tranquillity of growth, the 
nurturing and maturing of the goddess who lives without ef- 
fort. Here the overpowering reigns not in self-consuming wild- 
ness but without effort and fatigue; from out of the superior 
tranquillity of great riches, it produces and bestows the inex- 
haustible treasure that surpasses all zeal. Into this power 
bursts the violent one; year after year he breaks it open with 
his plows and drives the effortless earth into his restless en- 


130 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


deavor. Sea and earth, departure and upheaval are joined by 
the kai in line 334, to which corresponds the te in line 338. 

And now to all this the antistrophe: it names the birds in 
the air, the denizens of the water, bull and stallion in the 
mountains. The living things, lightly dreaming, living in their 
own rhythm and their own precinct, perpetually overflowing 
into new forms yet remaining in their one channel, know the 
place where they wander and pass the night. As living things, 
they are embedded in the power of the sea and the earth. 
Into this life as it rolls along self-contained, extraordinary in 
its own sphere and structure and ground, man casts his snares 
and nets; he snatches the living creatures out of their order, 
shuts them up in his pens and enclosures, and forces them 
under his yokes. On the one hand eruption and upheaval. On 
the other capture and constraint. 

At this point, before we pass to the second strophe and its 
antistrophe, it is necessary to insert a note calculated to ward 
off a misinterpretation of the whole poem—a misinterpreta- 
tion to which modern man readily inclines and which is in- 
deed frequent. We have already pointed out that this is no 
description and exposition of the activities and fields of ac- 
tivity of man, an essent among other essents, but a poetic out- 
line of his being, drawn from its extreme possibilities and 
limits. This in itself precludes the interpretation of this chorus 
as a narrative of man’s development from the savage hunter 
and primitive sailor to the civilized builder of cities. Such a 
notion is the product of ethnology and psychological anthro- 
pology. It stems from the unwarranted application of a natural 
science—and a false one at that—to man’s being. The basic 
fallacy underlying such modes of thought consists in the be- 
lief that history begins with the primitive and backward, the 
weak and helpless. The opposite is true. The beginning is the 
strangest and mightiest. What comes afterward is not de- 
velopment but the flattening that results from mere spreading 
out; it is inability to retain the beginning; the beginning is 
emasculated and exaggerated into a caricature of greatness 
taken as purely numerical and quantitative size and extension. 
That strangest of all beings is what he is because he harbors 
such a beginning in which everything all at once burst from 
superabundance into the overpowering and strove to master it. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 131 


If this beginning is inexplicable, it is not because of any 
deficiency in our knowledge of history. On the contrary, the 
authenticity and greatness of historical knowledge reside in 
en understanding of the mysterious character of this begin- 
ning. The knowledge of primordial history is not a ferreting 
out of primitive lore or a collecting of bones. It is neither half 
nor whole natural science but, if it is anything at all, mythology. 

The first strophe and antistrophe speak of the sea, the 
earth, the animal, as the overpowering power which bursts 
into manifestness through the acts of the violent one. 

Outwardly the second strophe passes from a description 
of the sea, the earth, animals to a characterization of man. 
But no more than the first strophe and antistrophe speak of 
nature in the restricted sense does the second strophe speak 
only of man. 

No, what is now named—language, understanding, senti- 
ment, passion, building—are no less a part of the overpower- 
ing power than sea, earth, and animal. The difference is only 
that the latter, the power that is man's environment, sustains, 
drives, inflames him, while the former reigns within him as 
the power which he, as the essent that he himself is, must take 
upon himself. 

This pervading force becomes no less overpowering be- 
cause man takes it into his power, which he uses as such. All 
this merely conceals the uncanniness of language, of the pas- 
sions, the powers by which man is ordained (gefügt) as a 
historical being, while it seems to him that it is he who dis- 
poses (verfügt) of them. The strangeness, the uncanniness 
of these powers resides in their seeming familiarity. Directly 
they yield themselves to man only in their nonessence ( Un- 
wesen ), so driving him and holding him out of his essence. 
In this way he comes to regard what is fundamentally more 
remote and overpowering than sea and earth as closest of all 
to him. 

How far man is from being at home in his own essence is 
revealed by his opinion of himself as he who invented and 
could have invented language and understanding, building 
and poetry. 

How could man ever have invented the power which per- 
vades him, which alone enables him to be a man? We shall 


132 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


be wholly forgetting that this song speaks of the powerful 
(deinon), the strange and uncanny, if we suppose that the 
poet makes man invent such things as building and language. 
The word edidaxato does not mean: man invented, but: he 
found his way to the overpowering and therein first found 
himself: the violent one, the wielder of power. In view of 
what has been said, the "himself" means at once he who 
breaks out and breaks up (ausbricht und umbricht, departs 
and plows ), he who captures and subjugates. 

It is this breaking out and breaking up, capturing and sub- 
jugating that opens up the essent as sea, as earth, as animal. 
It happens only insofar as the powers of language, of under- 
standing, of temperament, and of building are themselves 
mastered (bewältigt) in violence. The violence of poetic 
speech, of thinking projection, of building configuration, of 
the action that creates states is not a function of faculties that 
man has, but a taming and ordering of powers by virtue of 
which the essent opens up as such when man moves into it. 
This disclosure of the essent is the power that man must mas- 
ter in order to become himself amid the essent, i.e. in order to 
be historical. What is meant by deinon here in the second 
strophe must not be misinterpreted as invention or as a mere 
faculty or attribute of man. 

Only if we understand that the use of power in language, 
in understanding, in forming and building helps to create 
(i.e. always, to bring forth) the violent act (Gewalttat) of 
laying out paths into the environing power of the essent, only 
then shall we understand the strangeness, the uncanniness of 
all violence. For man, as he journeys everywhere, is not with- 
out issue in the external sense that he comes up against out- 
ward barriers and cannot go on. In one way or another he 
can always go farther into the etcetera. He is without issue 
because he is always thrown back on the paths that he him- 
self has laid out: he becomes mired in his paths, caught in the 
beaten track, and thus caught he compasses the circle of his 
world, entangles himself in appearance, and so excludes him- 
self from being. He turns round and round in his own circle. 
He can ward off whatever threatens this limited sphere. He can 
employ every skill in its place. The violence that originally 
creates the paths engenders its own mischief of versatility, 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 133 


which is intrinsically issueless, so much so that it bars itself 
from reflection about the appearance in which it moves. 

All violence shatters against one thing. That is death. It 
is an end beyond all consummation ( Vollendung ), a limit be- 
yond all limits. Here there is no breaking-out or breaking-up, 
no capture or subjugation. But this strange and alien (un- 
heimlich ) thing that banishes us once and for all from every- 
thing in which we are at home is no particular event that must 
be named among others because it, too, ultimately happens. 
It is not only when he comes to die, but always and essentially 
that man is without issue in the face of death. Insofar as man 
is, he stands in the issuelessness of death. Thus his being-there 
is the happening of strangeness. (For us this happening of a 
strangeness must be initially grounded in human being-there.) 

With the naming of this strange and powerful thing, the 
poetic project of being and human essence sets its own limit 
upon itself. 

For the second antistrophe does not go on to name still 
other powers but gathers those already named into their in- 
ner unity. The concluding strophe carries the whole back to 
its basic line. But as we have stressed in the first phase, the 
basic line of what is actually at the center of the song (the 
deinotaton) resides precisely in the unitary relation between 
the two meanings of deinon. Accordingly the final strophe, in 
summary, names three things. 

i. The power, the powerful, in which the action of the 
violent one moves, is the entire scope of the machination 
{Machenschaft ), machanoen, entrusted to him. We do not 
take the word “machination” in a disparaging sense. We have 
in mind something essential that is disclosed to us in the 
Greek word techné. Techné means neither art nor skill, to say 
nothing of technique in the modern sense. We translate techné 
by “knowledge.” But this requires explanation. Knowledge 
means here not the result of mere observations concerning 
previously unknown data. Such information, though indis- 
pensable for knowledge, is never more than accessory. Knowl- 
edge in the authentic sense of techné is the initial and per- 
sistent looking out beyond what is given at any time. In 
different ways, by different channels, and in different realms, 
this transcendence ( Hinaussein ) effects ( setzt ins Werk) what 


134 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


first gives the datum its relative justification, its potential de- 
terminateness, and hence its limit. Knowledge is the ability to 
put into work the being of any particular essent. The Greeks 
called art in the true sense and the work of art techné, be- 
cause art is what most immediately brings being (i.e. the ap- 
pearing that stands there in itself) to stand, stabilizes it in 
something present (the work). The work of art is a work not 
primarily because it is wrought ( gewirkt ), made, but because 
it brings about (er-wirkt) being in an essent; it brings about 
the phenomenon in which the emerging power, physis, comes 
to shine ( scheinen ). It is through the work of art as essent be- 
ing that everything else that appears and is to be found is first 
confirmed and made accessible, explicable, and understand- 
able as being or not being. 

Because art in a pre-eminent sense stabilizes and manifests 
being in the work as an essent, it may be regarded as the 
ability, pure and simple, to accomplish, to put-into-the-work 
( ins-Werk-setzen ), as techné. This accomplishment is a mani- 
festing realization ( Erwirken ) of being in the essent. This su- 
perior, realizing opening and keeping open is knowledge. The 
passion of knowledge is inquiry. Art is knowledge and there- 
fore techné. Art is not techné because it involves “technical” 
skill, tools, materials. 

Thus techné provides the basic trait of deinon, the violent; 
for violence ( Gewalt-tátigkeit) is the use of power ( Gewalt- 
brauchen) against the overpowering ( Uberwiltigende): 
through knowledge it wrests being from concealment into the 
manifest as the essent. 

2. Just as deinon as violence collects its essence in the fun- 
damental Greek word techné, so deinon as the overpowering 
is manifested in the equally fundamental dikeo. We translate 
it as Fug.” Here we understand Fug first in the sense of joint 
and framework ( Fuge und Gefüge); then as decree, dispen- 
sation, a directive that the overpowering imposes on its reign; 
finally, as the governing structure (das fiigende Gefiige ) 

* Heidegger is particularly free to define the word “Fug” as he 
wishes because the word does not occur in modern literary German 
except in the combination “mit Fug und Recht"—"with F. and 
justice," where it conveys no precise meaning but suggests "proper 


order," "fitness." This is why I have preferred to introduce the word 
in German. R.M. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 135 


which compels adaptation ( Einfügung) and compliance 
{ Sichfiigen ). 

If diké is translated as “justice” taken in a juridical, moral 
sense, the word loses its fundamental metaphysical meaning. 
The same applies to the interpretation of diké as norm. In all 
its realms and dominions the overpowering, in respect to its 
domination, is Fug. Being, physis, as power, is basic and origi- 
nal togetherness: logos; it is governing order ( fügender Fug ): 
diké. 

Thus the deinon as the overpowering (diké) and the deinon 
as the violent (techné) confront one another, though not as 
two given things. In this confrontation techné bursts forth 
against diké, which in turn, as Fug, the commanding order, 
disposes ( verfiigt ) of all techné. The reciprocal confrontation 
is. It is only insofar as the strangest thing of all, being-human, 
is actualized, insofar as man is present as history. 

3. The basic trait of the deinotaton lies in the interrelation 
between the two meanings of deinon. The sapient man sails 
into the very middle of the dominant order (Fug); he tears 
it open and violently carries being into the essent; yet he can 
never master the overpowering. Hence he is tossed back and 
forth between structure and the structureless, order and mis- 
chief ( Fug and Un-fug ), between the evil and the noble. Ev- 
ery violent curbing of the powerful is either victory or de- 
feat. Both, each in its different way, fling him out of home, 
and thus, each in its different way, unfold the dangerousness 
of achieved or lost being. Both, in different ways, are men- 
aced by disaster. The violent one, the creative man, who sets 
forth into the un-said, who breaks into the un-thought, com- 
pels the unhappened to happen and makes the unseen appear 
—this violent one stands at all times in venture (tolma, line 
371). In venturing to master being, he must risk the assault 
of the nonessent, mé kalon, he must risk dispersion, in-stability, 
disorder, mischief. The higher the summit of historical being- 
there, the deeper will be the abyss, the more abrupt the fall 
into the unhistorical, which merely thrashes around in issue- 
less and placeless confusion. 

Arrived at the end of the second phase, we may wonder 
what purpose can be served by a third. 

The third phase. The central truth of the song was set forth 


136 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


in the first phase. The second phase has led us through all the 
essential realms of the powerful and violent. The final strophe 
pulls the whole together into the essence of him who is strang- 
est of all. Certain details might be considered and elucidated 
more fully. But this would provide a mere appendage to what 
has already been said; it would not necessitate a new phase 
of interpretation. If we content ourselves with what the poem 
directly says, the interpretation is at an end. Actually it has 
just begun. The actual interpretation must show what does 
not stand in the words and is nevertheless said. To accomplish 
this the exegete must use violence. He must seek the essential 
where nothing more is to be found by the scientific interpreta- 
tion that brands as unscientific everything that transcends its 
limits. 

But here, where we must restrict ourselves to a single 
poem, we can undertake this third phase only from a limited 
point of view imposed by our main task, and even here we 
must confine ourselves to a few steps. Bearing in mind what 
has been said in the first phase, we start from the results of 
our explanation of the final strophe in the second phase. 

The deinotaton of the deinon, the strangest of the strange, 
lies in the conflict between diké and techné. The strangest is 
not the extreme rectilinear intensification of the strange. It 
is specifically the uniquely strange. The conflict between the 
overwhelming presence of the essent as a whole and man's vio- 
lent being-there creates the possibility of downfall into the is- 
sueless and placeless: disaster. But disaster and the possibility 
of disaster do not occur only at the end, when a single act of 
power fails, when the violent one makes a false move; no, this 
disaster is fundamental, it governs and waits in the conflict be- 
tween violence and the overpowering. Violence against the pre- 
ponderant power of being must shatter against being, if being 
rules in its essence, as physis, as emerging power. 

But this necessity of disaster can only subsist insofar as 
what must shatter is driven into such a being-there. Man is 
forced into such a being-there, hurled into the affliction 
(Not)* of such being, because the overpowering as such, in 


* The dictionary meanings of the German word “Not” are need, 
want, anguish, distress, affliction, ps eril, necessity. Insofar as one 
meaning can be disengaged from the whole, Heidegger’s primary 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 137 


order to appear in its power, requires a place, a scene of dis- 
closure. The essence of being-human opens up to us only 
when understood through this need compelled by being it- 
self. The being-there of historical man means: to be posited 
as the breach into which the preponderant power of being 
bursts in its appearing, in order that this breach itself should 
shatter against being. 

The strangest (man) is what it is because, fundamentally, 
it cultivates and guards the familiar, only in order to break 
out of it and to let what overpowers it break in. Being itself 
hurls man into this breaking-away, which drives him beyond 
himself to venture forth toward being, to accomplish being, 
to stabilize it in the work, and so hold open the essent as a 
whole. Therefore the violent one knows no kindness and con- 
ciliation ( Güte und Begütigung ) (in the usual sense); he can- 
not be mollified or appeased by success or prestige. In all 
this the violent, creative man sees only the semblance of ful- 
fillment, and this he despises. In willing the unprecedented, 
he casts aside all help. To him disaster is the deepest and 
broadest affirmation of the overpowering. In the shattering 
of the wrought work, in the knowledge that it is mischief 
( Unfug ) and sarma (a dunghill), he leaves the overpowering 
to its order ( Fug ). But all this not in the form of “psychic ex- 
periences" in which the soul of the creative man wallows, and 
still less in the form of petty feelings of inferiority, but wholly 
in terms of the accomplishment itself, the putting-into-the 
work. As history the overpowering, being, is confirmed in 
works. 

Thus the being-there of the historical man is the breach 
through which the being embodied in the essent can open. As 
such it is an in-cident (Zwischen-fall, a fall-between ), the 
incident in which suddenly the unbound powers of being 
come forth and are accomplished as history. The Greeks had 
a profound sense of this suddenness and uniqueness of being- 
there, forced on them by being itself, which disclosed itself 


meaning is “need,” because he has used this word “Not” as a 
translation for chre in the sixth fragment of Parmenides. But the 
word as used in German speech and poetry carries the primary 
implication of distress, ree affliction. 


138 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


to them as physis and logos and diké. It is inconceivable that 
the Greeks should have decided to turn out culture for the 
benefit of the next few millennia of Western history. In the 
unique need of their being-there they alone responded solely 
with violence, thus not doing away with the need but only 
augmenting it; and in this way they won for themselves the 
fundamental condition of true historical greatness. 

We shall fail to understand the mysteriousness of the es- 
sence of being-human, thus experienced and poetically car- 
ried back to its ground, if we snatch at value judgments of 
any kind. 

The evaluation of being-human as arrogance and pre- 
sumption in the pejorative sense takes man out of his essen- 
tial need as the in-cident. To judge in this way is to take man 
as something already-there, to put this something into an 
empty space, and appraise it according to some external table 
of values. But it is the same kind of misunderstanding to in- 
terpret the poet's words as a tacit rejection of being-human, 
a covert admonition to resign oneself without violence, to seek 
undisturbed comfort. This interpretation might even find some 
basis in the concluding lines of the poem. 

One who is thus (namely the strangest of all) should be 
excluded from hearth and council. But the final words of the 
chorus do not contradict what has previously been said about 
being-human. Insofar as the chorus turns against the strang- 
est of all, it says that this manner of being is not that of every 
day. Such being-there is not to be found in the usual bustle 
and activity. There is nothing surprising about these conclud- 
ing words; indeed, we should have to be surprised if they 
were lacking. Their attitude of rejection is a direct and com- 
plete confirmation of the strangeness and uncanniness of hu- 
man being. With its concluding words the song swings back 
to its beginning. 


But what has all this to do with Parmenides maxim? The 
maxim speaks nowhere of strangeness. Almost too coolly it 
limits itself to the belonging-together of apprehension and 
being. In considering the meaning of this bond we have di- 
gressed into an interpretation of Sophocles. How does this 
interpretation help us? Can we simply transpose it into an 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 139 


interpretation of Parmenides? No, we cannot. But we must 
remind ourselves of the essential and initial connection be- 
tween poetic and philosophical discourse; particularly when, 
as here, we are dealing with the poetry and thinking that first 
awakened and established the historical being-there of a peo- 
ple. But beyond this general relation, we find a definite trait 
of meaning that is common both to the poem and the philo- 
sophical maxim. 

In our second phase, in summing up the final strophe, we 
advisedly stressed the reciprocal relation between diké and 
techné. Techné is the overpowering order. Diké is the vio- 
lence of knowledge. The reciprocal relation between them is 
the happening of strangeness. 

We now maintain that the bond between noein (appre- 
hension) and einai (being) stated in the maxim of Parmenides 
is nothing other than this relation. If this is confirmed, we 
have proved our former contention that this maxim for the 
first time delimits the essence of being-human and does not 
just happen to speak of man in some indifferent respect. 

In proof of our assertion we shall first work out two general 
considerations. Then we shall attempt a detailed exegesis of 
the maxim. 

In the poetic relation between diké and techné, diké stands 
for the being of the essent as a whole. Even earlier than Sopho- 
cles we encounter this use of the word among the Greeks. The 
oldest saying that has come down to us, that of Anaximander, 
speaks of being in an essential connection with diké. 

Similarly Heraclitus speaks of diké in making an essential 
statement about being. Fragment 80 begins: eidenai de chré 
ton polemon eonta xynon kai diké erin. “It is necessary to bear 
in mind setting-apart ( Aus-einander-Setzung ) as essentially 
bringing-together and order (Fug) as contending . . .” Diké 
as the governing structure belongs to contending setting-apart. 
This contending setting-apart is also physis, which in emerg- 
ing, causes the appearing to shine (to be present), and ac- 
cordingly it is being (cf. Fragments 23 and 28). 

Finally, Parmenides himself is a crucial witness to the philo- 
sophical use of the word diké in speaking of being. For him 
Diké is a goddess. She guards the alternately closing and open- 
ing keys to the gates of day and night, i.e. to the paths of be- 


140 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


ing (that discloses), of appearance (that distorts) and noth- 
ingness (that closes). This means that the essent discloses 
itself only insofar as the structure (Fug) of being is guarded 
and preserved. Being as diké is the key to the essent in its 
structure. This meaning of diké follows beyond a doubt from 
the thirty mighty opening verses of Parmenides’ didactic poem 
that have come down to us. It becomes clear that both the 
poetic and the philosophical discourse on being name, i.e. 
create and define, it with the same word, dike. 

'The other general consideration necessary for the proof of 
our assertion is this. It has already been pointed out how in 
apprehension ( Vernehmung ) as ac-cepting anticipation ( Vor- 
nehmung ) the essent as such is disclosed and so comes forth 
from concealment. For the poet, the assault of techné against 
diké is the happening whereby man ceases to be at home. In 
his exile from home, the home is first disclosed as such. But 
in one with it and only thus, the alien, the overpowering, is 
disclosed as such. Through the event of homelessness the 
whole of the essent is disclosed. In this disclosure unconceal- 
ment takes place. But this is nothing other than the happen- 
ing of the unfamiliar. 

Yes, to be sure, one might answer, that is true of what the 
poet says. But what we miss in the sober maxim of Parmenides 
is the strangeness of which we have been speaking. 

Accordingly it is incumbent upon us to show this sober 
thought in its true light. This we shall do by a detailed in- 
terpretation. In advance we say: if it should turn out that ap- 
prehension (Vernehmung) in its bond with being (diké) 
demands violence and as violence is a need (Not) endured 
only in struggle in the sense of polemos and eris; if in the 
course of this demonstration it further turns out that appre- 
hension is expressly related to the logos and that this logos 
proves to be the ground of being-human, then our assertion 
of the inner kinship between the philosophical maxim and 
the poem will have been confirmed. 

We shall show three things: 

1. Apprehension is no mere process, but a de-cision. 

2. Apprehension stands in an essential kinship with the 
logos. The logos is a need. 

3. The logos is the essential foundation of language. As 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 141 


such it is a struggle and the ground on which man's historical 
being-there is built in the midst of the essent as a whole. 

Ad 1. To grasp adequately the essence of noein, apprehen- 
sion, it does not suffice to avoid lumping it together with the 
activity of thought or with judgments. We have characterized 
apprehension above as a receptive attitude toward the appear- 
ing of the essent. As such it is an independent departure upon 
a distinct path. But this implies that apprehension cuts across 
the intersection of the three paths. This it can do only if it is 
through and through a decision for being against nothing and 
thus a struggle with appearance. But such essential decision 
must use violence if it is to persevere against the continuous 
pressure of involvement in the everyday and commonplace. 
The violence of this decisive departure along the path to the 
being of the essent wrests man out of his home in what hap- 
pens to be nearest and most familiar to him. 

Only if we understand apprehension as such a departure 
shall we be fortified against the fallacy that consists in inter- 
preting it as just another of man's activities, as a self-explana- 
tory use of his spiritual faculties or even some psychological 
process that just happens to go on. No, apprehension is 
wrested from the habitual press of living—and by a contrary 
movement. Its bond with the being of the essent does not 
make itself. To name it is not merely to ascertain a fact, but 
points to the struggle by which it is forged. The maxim is 
sober in the manner of philosophy for which the basic form 
of pathos is the strictness of conceptual thought. 

Ad 2. We have cited Fragment 6 by way of explaining the 
differentiation of the three paths. In so doing we purposely 
postponed a detailed interpretation of the first verse. Mean- 
while we have come to read and hear it differently: Chre to 
legein te noein t'eon emmenai. But even then we translated: 
*Needful is the gathered? setting-forth as well as the appre- 
hension of this: the essent (is) being." We have seen that 
here noein and legein, apprehension and logos, are mentioned 
together, and also that chré is set emphatically at the begin- 


* Heidegger misquotes himself slightly. See the translation above, 
p. 94. There “sammelnd” (gathering), here "gesammelt" ( gath- 
ered), there “Seiend in dessen Sein," here “das Seiend (ist) Sein.” 
“von diesem" is added. R.M. 


142 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


ning of the verse. Needful are apprehension and logos. Legein 
is mentioned along with apprehension as a process of the same 
character. Indeed, legein is mentioned first. Logos here cannot 
mean ingathering as the hinge of being, but must, equated 
with apprehension, signify the (human) act of violence, by 
which being is gathered in its togetherness. Needful is collec- 
tion as it pertains to apprehension. Both must happen “for the 
sake of being." Ingathering means here: to collect oneself 
amid dispersion into the impermanent, to recapture oneself 
out of confusion in appearance. But this gathering that is 
still a turning-away can be accomplished only through the 
gathering which is a turning-to, which draws the essent into 
the togetherness of being. Thus logos as ingathering becomes 
a need (Not) and parts from logos in the sense of the to- 
getherness of being (physis). It is logos as ingathering, as 
man’s collecting-himself toward fitness ( Fug ), that first brings 
being-human into its essence, so thrusting it into homelessness, 
insofar as the home is dominated by the appearance of the 
ordinary, customary, and commonplace. 

It remains to be asked why the legein is mentioned before 
the noein. The answer is: it is from the legein that the noein 
first takes its essence as gathering apprehension. 

This definition of the essence of being-human at the begin- 
ning of Western philosophy is not accomplished by seizing 
upon any attributes in the living creature called “man” as op- 
posed to other living creatures. Being-human defines itself 
from out of a relation to what is as a whole. The human essence 
shows itself here to be the relation which first opens up being 
to man. Being-human, as the need ( Not ) of apprehension and 
collection, is a being-driven ( Nötigung ) into the freedom of 
undertaking techné, the sapient embodiment of being. This 
is the character of history. 

From the essence of logos as gathering there follows an es- 
sential consequence for the character of the legein. Because 
legein as gathering thus defined is related to the original to- 
getherness of being, and because being means to come into 
unconcealment, this gathering has a fundamental character 
of opening, making manifest. Legein thus enters into a clear 
and sharp opposition to concealing and hiding. 

This is directly and unmistakably attested by a maxim of 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 143 


Heraclitus. Fragment 93 says: “The ruler whose prophesy 
occurs at Delphi oute legei oute kryptei, neither gathers nor 
hides, alla sémainei, but gives hints." Here gathering stands 
in opposition to hiding. To gather is here to disclose, to make 
manifest. 

Here I think we may ask the simple question: whence can 
the word legein, to collect, have obtained the meaning to make 
manifest (un-conceal) in opposition to conceal, if not on the 
strength of its essential relation to logos in the sense of physis? 
The power which emerging shows itself is unconcealment. Ac- 
cordingly legein means: to produce the unconcealed as such, 
to produce the essent in its unconcealment. Thus the logos, 
not only in Heraclitus but still in Plato, has the character of 
déloun, making manifest. Aristotle characterizes the legein of 
the logos as apophainesthai, to bring-to-show-itself (see Sein 
und Zeit $8 7 and 44). Since the vitiation of the meaning of 
logos that was to make logic possible set in precisely with 
Plato and Aristotle, this characterization of legein as to dis- 
close and make manifest strongly indicates that this was the 
original meaning. Ever since then, for two thousand years, 
these ties between logos, alétheia, physis, noein, and idea 
have remained hidden in unintelligibility. 

But in the beginning: logos as the gathering that makes 
manifest, and in the same sense being as fitness (Fug) or 
physis, became the necessary essence of historical man. Thence 
it takes only a step to understand how logos, thus understood, 
determined the essence of language and how logos became a 
name for discourse. In accordance with its historical, history- 
disclosing essence, being-human is logos, the gathering and 
apprehending of the being of the essent: it is the happening 
of that strangest essent of all, in whom through violence, 
through acts of power (Gewalt-tátigkeit), the overpowering 
is made manifest and made to stand. But the chorus from 
Antigone has told us: simultaneously with man's departure 
into being he finds himself in the word, in language. 

In connection with the question of the essence of language, 
the question of its origin has arisen time and time again. Men 
have sought the answer in remote ways. And there lies the 
first, crucial answer to the question: The origin of language 
remains a mystery; not because men have not been clever 


144 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


enough, but because their sharpness and cleverness made a 
false move before even setting to work. The origin of lan- 
guage is in essence mysterious. And this means that language 
can only have arisen from the overpowering, the strange and 
terrible, through man's departure into being. In this departure 
language was being, embodied in the word: poetry. Language 
is the primordial poetry in which a people speaks being. Con- 
versely, the great poetry by which a people enters into history 
initiates the molding of its language. The Greeks created and 
experienced this poetry through Homer. Language was mani- 
fested to their being-there as departure into being, as a con- 
figuration disclosing the essent. 

It is by no means self-evident that language is logos, col- 
lection. But we understand this interpretation of language as 
logos when we consider the beginning of the historical being- 
there of the Greeks, the basic direction in which being dis- 
closed itself to them and in which they brought it to stand, 
stabilized it, in the essent. 

The word, the name, restores the emerging essent from the 
immediate, overpowering surge to its being and maintains it 
in this openness, delimitation, and permanence. Naming does 
not come afterward, providing an already manifest essent with 
a designation and a hallmark known as a word; it is the other 
way around: originally an act of violence that discloses being, 
the word sinks from this height to become a mere sign, and 
this sign proceeds to thrust itself before the essent. Pristine 
speech opens up the being of the essent in the structure of its 
collectedness. And this opening is collected in a second sense: 
the word preserves what was originally collected and so ad- 
ministers ( verwaltet ) the overpowering power. Standing and 
active in logos, which is ingathering, man is the gatherer. He 
undertakes to govern and succeeds in governing the power of 
the overpowering. 

But we know that this violence is the strangest, the uncan- 
niest thing of all. Impelled by tolma, daring, man comes neces- 
sarily to evil as well as to the brave and noble. Where 
language speaks as violent gathering, as a curbing of the 
overpowering, and as a safeguarding, then and then alone 
will there necessarily be a breaking of bonds ( Ungebunden- 
heit ) and loss. Consequently language, speech, is at the same 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 145 


time idle talk, a concealment rather than disclosure of being, 
dispersion, disorder and mischief ( Unfug ) rather than a gath- 
ering into structure and order. All by itself the logos does not 
make language. The legein is a need: chré to legein, needful 
is the gathering apprehension of the being of the essent. (Why 
this need?) 

Ad 3. Because the essence of language is found in the act 
of gathering within the togetherness of being, language as 
everyday speech comes to its truth only when speaking and 
hearing are oriented toward logos as collectedness in the sense 
of being. For in being and its structure, the essent is originally 
and crucially, in advance as it were, a legomenon, collected, 
said, pro-nounced ( vor- und hervorgesprochen ). Now at last 
we understand the full context of Parmenides’ saying that 
"noein" ( apprehension ) happens for the sake of being. 

The passage runs (Fragment 8, lines 34-6): "There is an 
inherent bond between apprehension and that for the sake 
of which apprehension occurs.* For not without the essent 
in which it (being) is already spoken, will you find (attain) 
apprehension." Its relation to the logos as physis makes legein 
into an apprehending gathering, and makes apprehension a 
gatherer. Therefore the legein, if it is to remain collected, must 
turn away from all mere hearsay, all mouthing and glibness. 
And indeed Parmenides himself makes a sharp contrast be- 
tween logos and glossa (Fragment 7, lines 3 ff.). The passage 
corresponds to the beginning of Fragment 6, which, referring 
to the first, indispensable path to being, says that it is needful 
to collect oneself, to concentrate, on the being of the essent. 
Here (in Fragment 7 ) Parmenides gives counsel for the trav- 
eling of the third path, the path into appearance. It leads 
through the essent which also stands in semblance. It is the 
customary path. Therefore the sapient man must unremit- 
tingly put himself back from this path into the legein and 
noein of the being of the essent: 


and let not cunning habit drive you toward this path, 

making you lose yourself in sightless gaping and noisy hearing 

and glibness; instead discriminate and decide (entscheide 
scheidend ), 


* This quotation is translated somewhat differently on p. 117. 
R.M. 


146 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


setting before you, gathered in one, the counsel of multiple 
conflict, 
given by me. 


Logos here stands in the closest connection with krinein, 
to separate ( Scheiden ) in the sense of de-cide ( Entscheiden ) 
in collecting toward the collectedness of being. Selection ( das 
auslesende "Lesen" ) is the foundation and proof of the pur- 
suit of being and the battle against appearance. The meaning 
of krinein includes to pick out, to favor, to set a measure that 
will determine rank. 

These three points carry our interpretation of the fragment 
far enough to show that Parmenides too speaks in essential 
respects of logos. Logos is a need ( Not) and intrinsically re- 
quires violence to ward off mouthing and dispersion. Logos 
as legein opposes physis. In this decision logos as gathering 
becomes the ground of being-human. That is why we were able 
to say that the decisive definition of man's essence was ac- 
complished for the very first time in this saying. To be a man 
means to take gathering upon oneself, to undertake a gather- 
ing apprehension of the being of the essent, the sapient in- 
corporation of appearing in the work, and so to administer 
(verwalten) unconcealment, to preserve it against cloaking 
and concealment. 

Thus at the very beginning of Western philosophy it be- 
came evident that the question of being necessarily embraces 
the foundations of being-there. 

This connection between being and being-there (and the 
corresponding inquiry into it) is not so much as touched by 
epistemological formulations of the question, and still less by 
the superficial observation that every view of being is de- 
pendent on a view of man. (An inquiry into being that is 
concerned not only with the being of the essent but with 
being itself in its essence calls explicitly for a grounding of 
being-there in the question of being. For this reason and only 
for this reason we have given this grounding the name of 
“fundamental ontology.” See Sein und Zeit, Introduction.) 

We say that this initial disclosure of the essence of being- 
human was decisive. But it was not preserved and held fast 
as the great beginning. It had an entirely different conse- 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 147 


quence: the definition—which later gained currency in the 
West and which remains unshaken in the dominant opinion 
and attitude—of man as the rational animal. By way of dem- 
onstrating the gulf between this definition and the initial dis- 
closure of man's essence, we select formulae embodying the 
beginning and the end. The end discloses itself in the formula 
anthropos = zoion logon echon: man, the animal equipped 
with reason. For the beginning we improvise a formula which 
at the same time sums up our reflections up to this point: 
physis = logos anthrópon echón: being, overpowering appear- 
ing, necessitates the gathering which pervades and grounds 
being-human. 

The end, to be sure, retains a vestige of the connection be- 
tween logos and being-human, but the logos has long since 
been externalized into a faculty of understanding and reason. 
The faculty itself is based on the existence ( Vorhandensein ) 
of animals of a special kind, on the zdion beltiston, the ani- 
mal that has turned out best (Xenophon). 

Quite on the contrary, being-human was initially grounded 
in the disclosure of the being of the essent. 

In the perspective of the common and prevailing definitions; 
in the perspective of modern and contemporary metaphysics, 
theory of knowledge, anthropology, and ethics, all determined 
by Christianity, our interpretation of the fragment must appear 
to be an arbitrary distortion. We are accused of reading into 
it things that an "exact interpretation" can never determine. 
This is true. In the usual present-day view what has been said 
here is a mere product of the farfetched and one-sided Heideg- 
gerian method of exegesis, which has already become pro- 
verbial. But here we may, indeed, we must ask: Which in- 
terpretation is the true one, the one which simply takes over 
a perspective into which it has fallen, because this perspective, 
this line of sight, presents itself as familiar and self-evident; 
or the interpretation which questions the customary perspec- 
tive from top to bottom, because conceivably—and indeed 
actually—this line of sight does not lead to what is in need 
of being seen. 

True—to give up the familiar and go back to an interpreta- 
tion that is also a questioning is a jump. In order to jump one 
has to take a proper run. It is the run that decides everything; 


148 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


for it implies that we ourselves really ask the questions and 
in these questions first create our perspectives. But this is not 
done shiftily and arbitrarily, nor is it done by clinging to a 
system set up as a norm, but in and out of historical necessity 
(Notwendigkeit), out of the need ( Not) of historical being- 
there. 

Legein and noein, to gather and to apprehend, are a need 
and an act of violence against the overpowering, but at the 
same time only and always for it. Time and time again the vio- 
lent ones must shrink back in fear from this use of force and yet 
they are unable to forego it. Amid this reluctant will to mas- 
tery, the suspicion is bound to flare up at times that perhaps 
the overpowering will be most securely and completely domi- 
nated if the concealment of being—the emerging power, whose 
essence is logos, the collectedness of the conflicting—is simply 
preserved, if in a certain sense every possibility of appearing, 
of manifestation, is denied. The violence of the strangest of 
all beings comprises this presumption (which actually im- 
plies the highest recognition): to overpower the appearing 
power by declining all openness toward it, to withstand it by 
denying its omnipotence the site in which to manifest itself. 

But for being-there such refusal of openness toward being 
means to renounce its essence, which demands: emerge from 
being or never enter into being-there. And this is expressed by 
Sophocles in a chorus from the tragedy of Oedipus in Colonus, 
lines 1224 f.: mē phynai ton hapanta ni/kai logon, “never to 
have entered into being-there prevails over the togetherness 
of the essent as a whole." 

Never to have taken being-there upon oneself, mē phynai, 
is said of man, of man who as the gatherer of physis is essen- 
tially gathered with it. Here physis, phynai are used in regard 
to man’s being, while logos is used in the Heraclitean sense, 
as the reigning order of the essent as a whole. These poetic 
words express the intimate relation of being-there to. being 
and its disclosure; they do so by naming what is remotest from 
being, namely not-being-there. Here the strangest and most 
terrible possibility of being-there is revealed: the possibility 
of breaking the preponderant power of being by a supreme 
act of violence against itself. Being-there has this possibility 
not as an empty evasion; no, insofar as it is, being-there is 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 149 


this possibility, for as being-there it must, in every act of vio- 
lence, shatter against being. 

This looks like pessimism. But it would be wrong to apply 
this term to Greek being-there. Not because the Greeks were 
basically optimistic but because these terms have no relevance 
to Greek life. The Greeks were more pessimistic than a pes- 
simist can ever be. But they were also more optimistic than 
any optimist. Their historical being-there preceded optimism 
and pessimism. 

To speak of optimism or pessimism is to look on being-there 
as a business proposition, successful or unsuccessful. This at- 
titude is expressed in Schopenhauer's well-known words: *Life 
is a business that doesn't cover its costs." What makes this 
proposition untrue is not that "life" does cover its costs in the 
end, but that life (as being-there) is simply not a business. 
True, for the last few centuries it has become one. And that 
is why Greek being-there is so mysterious to us. 

Not-being-there is the supreme victory over being. Being- 
there is unremitting affliction resulting from defeat and re- 
newed attempts at violence against being: at the site of its 
appearing, omnipotent being (literally) violates ( vergewaltigt, 
to do violence to, to rape) being-there; being indeed is this 
site, surrounding and controlling ( umwaltet und durchwaltet ) 
being-there and so holding it in being. 

Logos and physis move apart, but logos does not yet break 
away from physis. That is to say, it does not yet confront the 
being of the essent in such a way, it does not yet take such an 
attitude “toward” it, as to appoint itself (as reason) a court 
of justice over being; it does not yet undertake the task of de- 
termining and regulating the being of the essent. 

This development sets in only when the logos loses its initial 
essence, when being as physis is veiled and misinterpreted. 
Man's being-there changes accordingly. The slow end of this 
history, the slow end in which we have long been standing, 
is the domination of thinking as ratio (in the sense of under- 
standing as well as reason) over the being of the essent. Here 
begins the contest between “rationalism and irrationalism" 
that has been in progress to this day in every conceivable dis- 
guise and under the most contradictory titles. Irrationalism 
is only the obvious weakness and failure of rationalism and 


150 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


hence itself a kind of rationalism. Irrationalism is a way out 
of rationalism, an escape which does not lead into the open 
but merely entangles us more in rationalism, because it gives 
rise to the opinion that we can overcome rationalism by merely 
saying no to it, whereas this only makes its machinations the 
more dangerous by hiding them from view. 

In this lecture we do not propose to describe the interior 
history of this domination of thought (as the ratio of logic) 
over the being of the essent. Aside from the inherent difficulty 
of such an undertaking, such an account can have no historical 
cogency until we ourselves have awakened the energies of 
independent questioning from out of, and for the sake of, our 
own history in its present hour. 

Nevertheless it is necessary to show how the initial separa- 
tion between logos and physis led to the secession of the logos, 
which became the starting point for the domination of reason. 

This secession of the logos which started logos on its way 
to becoming a court of justice over being occurred in Greek 
philosophy itself. Indeed, it brought about the end of Greek 
philosophy. We shall only master Greek philosophy as the 
beginning of Western philosophy if we also understand this 
beginning in the beginning of its end. For the ensuing period 
it was only this end that became the “beginning,” so much 
so that it concealed the original beginning. But this beginning 
of the end of the great beginning, the philosophy of Plato and 
Aristotle, remains great even if we totally discount the great- 
ness of its Western consequences. 

Now we asked: How did this secession of the logos, this 
priority of logos over being, come about? How did the sepa- 
ration between being and thinking enter upon its decisive 
form? Here we can only sketch this history in a few bold 
strokes. We start from the end and ask: 

1. What was the relation between physis and logos at the 
end of Greek philosophy, in Plato and Aristotle? How was 
physis understood? What form and function had logos as- 
sumed? 

2. How did this end come about? What was the actual 
ground of the transformation? 

Ad 1. In the end the word idea, eidon, “idea,” came to 
the fore as the decisive and predominant name for being 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 151 


(physis). Since then the interpretation of being as idea has 
dominated all Western thinking throughout the history of its 
transformations down to the present day. This origin also ex- 
plains why, in the great and definitive culmination of the first 
period of Western thinking, in the system of Hegel, the reality 
of the real, being in the absolute sense, is conceived as “idea” 
and expressly so called. But what does it mean that physis 
should have been interpreted as idea in Plato? 

In our first introductory characterization of the Greek ex- 
perience of being, we listed idea, eidos among other names 
for it. In reading the philosophy of Hegel or of any other 
modern thinker, or in studying medieval Scholasticism, we 
frequently run across the use of the word “idea” for being. 
This, if we are not mistaken, is incomprehensible on the basis 
of current ideas. But we understand it readily if we start from 
the beginning of Greek philosophy. Then we can instantly 
measure the distance between the interpretations of being as 
physis and as idea. 

The word idea means that which is seen in the visible, the 
aspect it offers. What is offered is the appearance, eidos, of 
what confronts us. The appearance of a thing is that wherein, 
as we say, it presents, introduces itself to us, places itself 
before (vor-stellt) us and as such stands before us, that 
wherein and as such it is present, i.e. in the Greek sense, ís. 
This standing is the stability of that which has emerged from 
out of itself, of physis. But from the standpoint of man this 
standing-there of the stable and permanent is at the same time 
the surface of what is present through itself, the apprehensible. 
In the appearance, the present, the essent, presents its what 
and how. It is apprehended and taken, it is in the possession of 
an acceptance, its property ( Habe), it is the accessible pres- 
ence of the present: ousia. Thus ousia can signify both: the 
presence of something present and this present thing in the 
what of its appearance ( Aussehen ). 

Herein is concealed the source of the subsequent distinc- 
tion between existentia and essentia. (Whereas if we blindly 
take over the traditional and current differentiation of existen- 
tia and essentia, we shall never understand how precisely ex- 
istentia and essentia and the difference between them stand 
out from the being of the essent and thereby characterize it. 


152 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


But if we understand idea (appearance) as presence, it re- 
veals itself in a twofold sense as Stándigkeit (stability, stand- 
ingness ). In the appearance there lies first the standing-out- 
of-unconcealment, the simple estin. In the appearance is 
disclosed second that which appears, that which stands, the 
ti estin.) 

Thus the idea constitutes the essent. But here idea and 
eidos are used in an extended sense, not only for that which is 
visible to the physical eye but for everything that can be per- 
ceived. What an essent is lies in its appearance, but the ap- 
pearance presents (makes present) the what. 

But, we shall have asked by now, is this interpretation of 
being as idea not genuinely Greek? After all, it arises with un- 
deniable necessity from the experience of being as physis, as 
emerging power, as appearing, as standing-in-the-light. What 
does that which appears show in its appearing ( Erscheinen ) 
if not its appearance ( Aussehen ), the idea? In what way does 
the interpretation of being as idea differ from the interpreta- 
tion as physis? Is the tradition not perfectly right in seeing 
Greek philosophy—as it has done for centuries—in the light 
of Platonic philosophy? Far from representing an opposition 
to the beginning, not to say a decline, Plato's interpretation 
of being actually develops and sharpens this beginning and 
grounds it in the "theory of ideas." Plato is the completion of 
the beginning. 

Actually it cannot be denied that the interpretation of be- 
ing as idea results from the basic experience of being as physis. 
It is, as we say, a necessary consequence of the essence of 
being as emerging Scheinen (seeming, appearing, radiance ). 
And herein there is no departure, not to mention a falling-off, 
from the beginning. No, that is true. 

But if the essential consequence is exalted to the level of 
the essence itself and takes the place of the essence, what 
then? Then we have a falling-off, which must in turn produce 
strange consequences. And that is what happened. The crux 
of the matter is not that physis should have been characterized 
as idea but that the idea should have become the sole and de- 
cisive interpretation of being. 

We can easily appraise the distance between the two in- 
terpretations if we consider the difference between the per- 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 153 


spectives in which these two definitions of being, physis and 
idea, move. Physis is the emerging power, the standing-there- 
in-itself, stability. Idea, appearance as what is seen, is a de- 
termination of the stable insofar and only insofar as it en- 
counters vision. But physis as emerging power is by the same 
token an appearing. Except that the appearing is ambiguous. 
Appearing means first: that which gathers itself, which brings- 
itself-to-stand in its togetherness and so stands. But second 
it means: that which, already standing-there, presents a front, 
a surface, offers an appearance to be looked at. 

From the standpoint of space, the difference between ap- 
pearing and appearing is this: appearing in the first and au- 
thentic sense as bringing-itself-to-stand in togetherness in- 
volves space, which it first conquers; as it stands there, it 
creates space for itself; it produces space and everything per- 
taining to it; it is not copied. Appearing in the second sense 
emerges from an already finished space; it ís situated in the 
rigid measures of this space, and we see it by looking to- 
ward it. The vision makes the thing. Now this vision becomes 
decisive, instead of the thing itself. Appearing in the first 
sense opens up space. Appearing in the second sense merely 
circumscribes and measures the space that has already been 
opened. 

But does not Parmenides maxim say: Being and appre- 
hension—that which is seen and the act of seeing—belong to- 
gether? Yes, to be sure, the thing seen belongs to seeing, but 
from this it does not follow that being-seen alone determines, 
or could determine, the presence of the thing seen. Parmenides" 
maxim does not say that being should be understood on the 
basis of apprehension, i.e. as something merely apprehended; 
it says rather that apprehension should be considered for the 
sake of being. Apprehension should so disclose the essent as 
to put it back in its being; it should consider that the essent 
pre-sents itself and as what. But in the interpretation of being 
as idea, not only is an essential consequence twisted into an 
essence but the falsification is once again misinterpreted. And 
this too occurred in the course of Greek experience and in- 


terpretation. 
The idea, as the appearance of the essent, came to consti- 


154 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


tute its what. Thereby the whatness, the "essence," ie. the 
concept of essence, also became ambiguous: 

a. an essent asserts itself, it has authority, it summons and 
brings into being whatever pertains to it, including precisely 
conflict. 

b. an essent asserts itself as this and that; it has this what- 
determinateness. 

We have shown briefly how in the course of the change 
from physis to idea, the ti estin (quiddity, whatness) emerged 
and the hoti estin (quoddity, that-ness) * came to be distin- 
guished from it. We have thus indicated the origin of essentia 
and existentia. Here we shall not go into it more closely. (The 
question is discussed in an unpublished lecture delivered in 
the summer semester of 1927.) 

But as soon as the essence of being resides in whatness 
(idea), whatness, as the being of the essent, becomes that 
which is most beingful in an essent. It becomes the actual 
essent, ontós on. Being as idea is exalted, it becomes true be- 
ing, while being itself, previously dominant, is degraded to 
what Plato calls mé on, what really should not be and really 
is not, because in the realization it always deforms the idea, 
the pure appearance, by incorporating it in matter. The idea 
now becomes a paradeigma, a model. At the same time, the 
idea necessarily becomes an ideal. The copy actually “is” not; 
it merely partakes of being, it is a methexis. The chdrismos, 
the cleft, has opened between the idea as what really is, the 
prototype and archetype, and what actually is not, the copy 
and image. 

From the standpoint of the idea, appearing now takes on a 
new meaning. What appears—the phenomenon-is no longer 
physis, the emerging power, nor is it the self-manifestation of 
the appearance; no, appearing is now the emergence of the 
copy. Since the copy never equals its prototype, what appears 
is mere appearance, actually an illusion, a deficiency. Now 
the on becomes distinct from the phainomenon. And this de- 
velopment brings with it still another vital consequence. Be- 
cause the actual repository of being is the idea and this is the 
prototype, all disclosure of being must aim at assimilation to 
the model, accommodation to idea. The truth of physis, ala- 


* The fact that something is. R.M. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 155 


theia as the unconcealment that is the essence of the emerging 
power, now becomes homoidsis and mimésis, assimilation and 
accommodation, orientation by . . . , it becomes a correctness 
of vision, of apprehension as representation. 

Once we fully understand all this, it becomes undeniable 
that the interpretation of being as idea is a far cry from the 
original beginning. Yet when we speak of a decline it should 
be noted that this decline remains lofty; it does not sink into 
baseness. We can judge this loftiness from the following. The 
great period of Greek being-there was essentially the only 
classical age; it was so great that it provided the metaphysical 
conditions underlying the possibility of all classicism. The 
basic concepts idea, paradeigma, homoidsis, and mimésis fore- 
shadow the metaphysics of classicism. Plato was not yet a 
classicist, because he could not be one, but he was the classic 
of classicism. In itself the transformation of being from physis 
to idea gave rise to one of the essential movements in the his- 
tory of the West, and not only of its art. 

Now let us see what becomes of the logos with the new 
interpretation of physis. The essent is disclosed in the logos as 
gathering. This is first effected in language. Consequently 
the logos becomes the essential determinant of discourse. Lan- 
guage—what is uttered and said and can be said again—is the 
custodian of the disclosed essent. What has once been said 
can be repeated and passed on. The truth preserved in it 
spreads, and in the process the essent originally gathered and 
disclosed is not each time experienced for itself. In the trans- 
mission the truth detaches itself as it were from the essent. 
This can go so far that the repetition becomes a mere bab- 
bling by rote, a glossa. Statement is always exposed to this 
danger. (See Sein und Zeit, 8 44b.) 

From this it follows that the decision regarding the truth 
is effected in conflict between authentic discourse and mere 
babbling. Logos in the sense of discourse and utterance be- 
comes the realm and the scene of decision concerning the 
truth, ie. originally, the unconcealment of the essent and 
hence its being. Initially the logos as gathering is the event 
of unconcealment, grounded in unconcealment and serving 
it. Now logos as statement becomes the abode of truth in the 
sense of correctness. And this process culminates in Aristotle's 


156 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


proposition to the effect that logos as statement is that which 
can be true or false. Truth that was originally unconcealment, 
a happening of the dominant essent itself, governed by gath- 
ering, now becomes an attribute of the logos. In becoming 
an attribute of statement, the truth not only shifts its abode; 
it changes its essence as well. From the standpoint of state- 
ment, the truth is achieved if discourse adheres to what it 
speaks of; if the statement follows the essent. The truth be- 
comes the correctness of the logos. With this the logos has 
departed from its original inclusion in the happening of un- 
concealment, so that the decision concerning the truth and 
hence concerning the essent is made on the basis of, and 
with a view to, the logos; and this applies to the decision not 
only concerning the essent but even and above all concern- 
ing being. Logos is now legein ti kata tinos, to say something 
about something. What is spoken of is what in every case un- 
derlies the statement, what is set before it ready made ( das 
ihm Vorliegende), hypokeimenon (subjectum). From the 
standpoint of the logos as independent statement, being be- 
comes this being-set-before. (This definition of being, like 
the idea, is foreshadowed in the physis. Only the power that 
emerges of itself can, as presence, come to define itself as 
appearance and ready-made subject ( Vorliegen ).) 

In statement the underlying essent may be represented in 
different ways: as having such and such properties, such and 
such magnitude, such and such relations. Properties, magni- 
tude, relations are determinations of being. Because, as modes 
of being-said, they are derived from logos—and because to 
state is katégorein—the determinations of the being of the es- 
sent are called katégoriai, categories. Thus the doctrine of be- 
ing and of the determinations of the essent as such becomes a 
discipline which searches for the categories and their order. 
The goal of all ontology is a doctrine of categories. It has long 
been taken for granted that the essential characteristics of be- 
ing are categories. But fundamentally it is strange and be- 
comes comprehensible only if we understand not only how 
the logos as statement broke away from physis but how it set 
itself up in opposition to physis as the decisive domain, the 
source of all determinations of being. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 157 


But logos, phasis, speech in the sense of statement, has be- 
come the arbiter over the being of the essent in so profound 
a sense that whenever one statement stands against another, 
when a contradiction, antiphasis, occurs, the contradictory 
cannot be. Conversely, what is not contradictory has at least 
the possibility of being. The old controversy as to whether 
Aristotle’s principle of contradiction was meant “ontologically” 
or “logically” is wrongly put, because for Aristotle there was 
neither “ontology” nor “logic.” Both arose only on the basis 
of Aristotelian philosophy. Actually the principle of contra- 
diction has “ontological” significance because it is a basic law 
of the logos, a “logical proposition.” Accordingly, the suspen- 
sion of the principle of contradiction in Hegel’s dialectic is 
not an end to the domination of the logos but only its extreme 
intensification. (That Hegel should have given the name of 
“logic” to what is actually metaphysics, i.e. “physics,” recalls 
both logos as abode of the categories and logos in the sense of 
the original physis.) 

In the form of statement logos itself became something 
already-there. It became something handy that one handles 
in order to gain and secure the truth as correctness. The next, 
short step was to take this method of acquiring truth as a 
tool, organon, that had to be handled in the right way. What 
made this all the more necessary was that with the change 
of physis to eidos and of logos to katégoria the original dis- 
closure of the being of the essent ceased, and henceforth the 
true, now interpreted as the correct, merely spread by way 
of discussion, teaching, and rules, becoming steadily broader 
and flatter. For the benefit of this process the logos had to be 
fashioned into a tool. Logic was about to be born. 

It was not by mistake that the ancient philosophy of the 
schools subsumed all the treatises of Aristotle relating to the 
logos under the title of “Organon.” With them logic, in its 
essentials, was completed. Two thousand years later Kant 
declared in the preface to the second edition of the Critique 
of Pure Reason that logic “since Aristotle has not taken a single 
step backward," but "that it has also been unable to take a 
single step forward to this day and thus to all appearances 
seems to be concluded and complete." This not only seems to 


158 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


be so. It is so. For despite Kant and Hegel, logic has not made 
a single advance in the essential and initial questions. The only 
possible step that remains is to stand on the very ground from 
which logic rose and to overturn it (as the dominant perspec- 
tive for the interpretation of being). 

Let us now sum up what has been said of physis and of 
logos: logos becomes idea (paradeigma), truth becomes cor- 
rectness. Logos becomes statement, the locus of truth as cor- 
rectness, the source of the categories, the fundamental prin- 
ciple in regard to the possibilities of being. "Idea" and 
"category" become the two terms that dominate Western 
thought, action, and evaluation, indeed all Western being- 
there. The transformation of physis and logos and hence of 
their relation to one another is a decline from the first begin- 
ning. The philosophy of the Greeks conquered the Western 
world not in its original beginning but in the incipient end, 
which in Hegel assumed great and definitive form. Where 
history is authentic it does not die by merely ceasing; it does 
not just stop living ( ver-enden ) like the animals; it can only 
die historically. 

But what happened, what must have happened to bring 
Greek philosophy to this incipient end, to this transformation 
of physis and logos? This takes us to the second question. 

Ad 2. In the change we have described, two factors must 
be noted. 

a. It begins in the very essence of physis and logos, or 
more precisely, in a consequence of this essence: what ap- 
pears (in its shining forth, its seeming) shows an aspect; what 
has been said enters forthwith into the realm of talk and 
statement. Thus the change does not come from outside but 
from "within." But what does ^within" mean here? The ques- 
tion does not reside in physis for itself and logos for itself. We 
see from Parmenides that the two are essentially connected. 
The relation between them is the sustaining and governing 
ground of their essence, "their heart and core," even though 
the ground of the relation itself is primarily and actually con- 
tained in the essence of physis. But what is the nature of this 
relation? This we shall see by stressing a second factor in the 
change under discussion. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 159 


b. In each case a consequence of the change is that, from 
the standpoint both of the idea and of statement, the original 
essence of truth, alétheia (unconcealment) has changed to 
correctness. For unconcealment is that heart and core, i.e. the 
dominant relation between physis and logos in the original 
sense. The very essence of dominance is emerging-into-uncon- 
cealment. But apprehension and gathering govern the opening 
up of unconcealment for the essent. The transformation of 
physis and logos into idea and statement has its inner ground 
in a transformation of the essence of truth from unconceal- 
ment to correctness. 

This essence of truth could not be maintained in its initial, 
original force. Unconcealment, the space created for the ap- 
pearing of the essent, broke down. “Idea” and “statement,” 
ousia and katégoria were saved from the ruins. When neither 
the essent nor gathering could be preserved and understood 
from the standpoint of unconcealment, only one possibility 
remained: the disjoined parts that were already there could 
only be brought together in a relationship which itself had a 
character of already-thereness. A ready-made logos had to as- 
similate and accommodate itself to a ready-made essent as 
its object. Yet a last glimmer and semblance of the original 
essence of alétheia was preserved. (The already-there neces- 
sarily comes forward into unconcealment, and just as neces- 
sarily the statement that re-presents (vor-stellt) it advances 
into the same unconcealment.) But the remaining semblance 
of alétheia no longer has sufficient sustaining power or tension 
to be the determining ground for the essence of truth. And 
this it has never again become. On the contrary. Ever since 
idea and category became sovereign, philosophers have tor- 
mented themselves in vain, seeking by every possible and im- 
possible stratagem to explain the relation between statement 
(thinking) and being—in vain, because they never again car- 
ried the question of being back to its native ground and soil, 
thence to unfold it. 

Yet the breakdown of unconcealment, as we briefly call 
this event, did not spring from a mere deficiency, an inability 
to sustain this essence that was entrusted to historical man. 
The cause of the breakdown lay first of all in the greatness 
of the beginning and in the essence of the beginning itself. 


160 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


(“Decline” and “breakdown” are negative terms only in a 
superficial sense.) Since it is a beginning, the beginning must 
in a sense leave itself behind. (Thus it necessarily conceals 
itself, but this self-concealment is not nothing.) A beginning 
can never directly preserve its full momentum; the only pos- 
sible way to preserve its force is to repeat, to draw once again 
( wieder-holen) more deeply than ever from its source. And 
it is only by repetitive thinking ( denkende Wieder-holung ) 
that we can deal appropriately with the beginning and the 
breakdown of the truth. The need (Not) of being and the 
greatness of its beginning are no object of a merely historical 
observation, explanation, and evaluation. This does not pre- 
clude but rather requires that the historical course of this 
collapse be as far as possible elucidated. Here in this lecture 
a single decisive indication must suffice. 

We know from Heraclitus and Parmenides that the uncon- 
cealment of being is not simply given. Unconcealment occurs 
only when it is achieved by work: the work of the word in po- 
etry, the work of stone in temple and statue, the work of the 
word in thought, the work of the polis as the historical place 
in which all this is grounded and preserved. (In accordance 
with what has been said above, ^work" is to be taken here 
in the Greek sense of ergon, the creation that discloses the 
truth (in die Unverborgenheit herstellen ) of something that 
is present.) The struggle for the unconcealment of the essent 
and hence for being itself in the work, this struggle for un- 
concealment, which even in itself is continuous conflict, is at 
the same time a combat against concealment, disguise, false 
appearance. 

Appearance, doxa, is not something beside being and un- 
concealment; it belongs to unconcealment. But doxa is itself 
ambiguous. It means the view which something presents of 
itself and at the same time the view that men have. Being- 
there defines itself in these views. They are stated and passed 
on. Thus doxa is a kind of logos. The prevailing views now 
block men's view of the essent. The essent is deprived of the 
possibility of appearing spontaneously and turning toward ap- 
prehension. The view (Aussicht) that usually turns toward 
us is distorted into an opinion ( Ansicht ). The rule of opinions 
perverts and distorts the essent. 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 161 


The Greek for “to distort something" is pseudesthai. Thus 
the struggle for the unconcealment of the essent, alétheia, be- 
came a struggle against pseudos, distortion and perversion. 
But it is in the very nature of struggle that whether a con- 
testant wins or loses he becomes dependent on his adversary. 
Because the battle against untruth is a battle against the 
pseudos, the battle for the truth becomes—from the stand- 
point of the combated pseudos—a battle for the a-pseudes, the 
undistorted, unperverted. 

With this the original experience of truth as unconcealment 
is endangered. For the undistorted is only achieved if appre- 
hension and comprehension are turned, without distortion, 
straight toward the essent, but this means that they are di- 
rected (sich richten) by it. The way to truth as correctness 
( Richtigkeit ) lies open. 

This transformation of unconcealment by way of distortion 
to undistortion and thence to correctness must be seen in one 
with the transformation of physis to idea, of logos as gathering 
to logos as statement. On the basis of all this, the definitive 
interpretation of being that is fixated in the word ousia now 
disengages itself and comes to the fore. It signifies being in 
the sense of permanent presence, already-thereness. What ac- 
tually has being is accordingly what always is, aei on. Perma- 
nently present is what we must go back to in comprehending 
and producing: the model, the idea. Permanently present is 
what we must go back to in all logos, statement; it is what 
lies-before, hypokeimenon, subjectum. From the standpoint 
of physis, emergence, what was always-there is the proteron, 
the earlier, the a priori. 

This determination of the being of the essent comes to 
characterize all comprehension and statement of the essent. 
The hypokeimenon is the forerunner of the subsequent in- 
terpretation of the essent as object. Apprehension, noein, is 
taken over by the logos in the sense of statement. Thus it 
becomes the apprehension which, in determining something 
as something, thinks-through (durch-nimmt, durch-vernim- 
mit ) what it encounters, dianoeisthai. This discursive thinking- 
through defines the understanding in the sense of evaluating 
representation. Apprehension becomes understanding; appre- 
hension becomes reason. 


162 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


Christianity reinterprets the being of the essent as created 
being. Thought and knowledge come to be differentiated from 
faith (fides). This does not impede the rise of rationalism and 
irrationalism but rather prepares the way for it and intensi- 
fies it. 

The essent is held to have been created by God, i.e. ration- 
ally preconceived. Hence as soon as the creature's relation 
to the creator is relaxed and, concomitantly, as man's reason 
makes itself predominant and even sets itself up as absolute, 
the being of the essent inevitably becomes thinkable in terms 
of pure mathematical thought. This calculable and calculated 
being makes the essent into what can be mastered by modern, 
mathematically structured technology, which is something es- 
sentially different from every other hitherto known use of tools. 

Essent is only what, when correctly thought, stands up to 
correct thinking. 

The principal name, i.e. the crucial interpretation of the 
being of the essent is ousia. As a philosophical concept the 
word means permanent presence. At the time when this word 
had already become a name for the dominant concept of phi- 
losophy, it still retained its original meaning: hē hyperchousa 
ousia (Isocrates) signifies present property status. But even 
this basic meaning of ousia with its implications for the in- 
terpretation of being could not maintain itself. Ousia now be- 
gan to be interpreted as substantia. This meaning retained 
its currency in the Middle Ages and in the modern era down 
to our own day. And Greek philosophy has been interpreted 
retroactively, i.e. falsified from top to bottom from the stand- 
point of the dominant concept of substance—the concept of 
function is only its mathematical variant. 

Thus ousia has become the decisive term for being. It still 
remains to be seen how the distinctions between being and 
becoming, being and appearance, are conceived in the light 
of this ousia. We recall the schema of our distinctions: 


becoming «—————- being ———> appearance 


| 


thinking 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 163 


In opposition to becoming stands eternal permanence. In 
opposition to appearance as mere semblance stands what is 
actually seen, the idea which, as the ontós on, is again the per- 
manent and enduring as opposed to changing appearance. But 
becoming and appearance are not determined only on the 
basis of ousia, for ousia in turn has been essentially defined 
by its relation to logos, discursive judgment, dianoia. Accord- 
ingly, becoming and appearance are defined in the perspec- 
tive of thought. 

From the standpoint of evaluating thought, which always 
starts from something permanent, becoming appears as im- 
permanence. In the realm of the already-there, impermanence 
is manifested primarily as not remaining in the same place. 
Becoming is seen as change of place, phora, transposition. All 
becoming is regarded as motion, and the decisive aspect of 
motion is change of place. With the rising domination of 
thought in the sense of modern mathematical rationalism no 
other form of becoming besides motion as change of place is 
recognized. Where other phenomena of motion show them- 
selves, one tries to understand them in terms of change of 
place. Change of place itself, motion, is in turn conceived in 


s 
terms of velocity: v =F" In his Regulae (No. xu) Descartes, 


the philosophical founder of this mode of thought, ridiculed 
every other concept of motion. 

Like becoming, appearance, the other antithesis to being, 
is also determined in accordance with ousia, from the stand- 
point of thought (calculation). Appearance, illusion, is the 
incorrect. Its ground is to be sought in distorted thinking. Ap- 
pearance becomes mere logical incorrectness, fallacy. Now 
for the first time we can measure the full bearing of the op- 
position between thought and being: thought establishes its 
domination (in respect to the crucial determination of es- 
sence) over being and at the same time over what is opposed 
to being. This domination goes still further. For as soon as 
logos in the sense of statement assumes the rule over being, 
the moment being is experienced and conceived as ousia, al- 
ready-thereness, the distinction between being and the ought 
is in preparation. Our schema of the delimitations of being 
now looks as follows: 


164 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


The ought 


| 


Becoming «————— Being ————> Appearance 
Thinking 


4. Being and the Ought 


As our diagram suggests, this distinction goes in another 
direction. The distinction between being and thinking is 
downward. This indicates that thought is the sustaining and 
determining ground of being. The differentiation between 
being and the ought, on the other hand, is upward. This sug- 
gests that while being is grounded in thought it is surmounted 
by the ought. In other words: being is no longer the decisive 
factor. But is it not after all the idea, the prototype? Yes, but 
precisely because of their character as prototypes, ideas are 
no longer decisive. For since the idea presents a view ( Aus- 
sehen ), it is in a sense an essent (on), and as such demands 
in turn a determination of its being, i.e. once again a single 
view. According to Plato the idea of ideas, the supreme idea, 
is the idea tou agathou, the idea of the good. 

Here the “good” does not mean the morally proper but the 
valiant (das Wackere), which accomplishes and can accom- 
plish what is appropriate. The agathon is the standard as such, 
what first endows being with the power ( Vermógen ) to be- 
come a prototype. The bestower of such power is the first 
potency. But insofar as the ideas constitute being, ousia, the 
idea tou agathou, the supreme idea, stands epekeina tés ousias, 
beyond being. Thus being itself, not as such but as idea, comes 
into opposition to something other, on which it, being, is de- 
pendent. The supreme idea has become the model of the 
models. 

No elaborate discussions are now needed to show that in 
this differentiation, as in the others, what is set apart from 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 165 


being, the ought, is not superimposed on being from some- 
where outside. Being itself, interpreted as idea, brings with 
it a relation to the prototypical, the exemplary, the ought. As 
being itself becomes fixated as idea, it strives to make good 
the resulting degradation of being. But by now this is possible 
only if something is set above being, something that being 
never is yet but always ought to be. 

Here we have wished only to elucidate the essential origin 
of the distinction between being and the ought or what is 
basically the same, its historical beginning. We shall not go 
into the history of its developments and transformations. We 
wish to make only one essential point. In connection with all 
the determinations of being and the distinctions we have men- 
tioned, we must bear one thing in mind: because being is 
initially physis, the power that emerges and discloses, it dis- 
closes itself as eidos and idea. This interpretation never rests 
exclusively or even primarily on philosophical exegesis. 

We have seen that the ought is opposed to being as soon 
as being defines itself as idea. With this definition, thought 
as the logos of statement (dialegesthai) assumes a crucial role. 
Thus it is in the modern era, when this very same thought 
becomes dominant in the form of self-sufficient reason, that 
the distinction between being and the ought really comes 
into its own. The process is completed in Kant. For Kant the 
essent is nature, i.e. that which can be determined and is de- 
termined in mathematical-physical thinking. To nature is op- 
posed the categorical imperative, also determined by reason 
and as reason. In relating it to the mere essent as instinctive 
nature Kant calls it explicitly the ought (Sollen). Fichte 
proceeded to make the opposition between being and the 
ought the express foundation of his system. In the course of 
the nineteenth century the priority passed to the essent in the 
Kantian sense—the empirical world of the sciences which now 
took in the historical and economic sciences. This predomi- 
nance of the essent endangered the ought in its role as standard 
and criterion. The ought was compelled to bolster up its claim 
by seeking its ground in itself. The moral claim (Sollensan- 
spruch) had to present its own justification. Obligation, the 
ought, could emanate only from something which in itself 
raised a moral claim, which had an intrinsic value, which was 


166 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


itself a value. The values as such now became the foundation 
of morality (the ought). But since the values are opposed to 
the being of the essent in the sense of facts, they themselves 
cannot be. Therefore they were said to have validity. The val- 
ues became the crucíal criteria for all realms of the essent, i.e. 
of the already-there. History came to be regarded as a realiza- 
tion of values. 

Plato conceived being as idea. The idea was a prototype 
and as such set the measure. What seems more plausible than 
to take Plato's ideas in the sense of values and to interpret 
the being of the essent from the standpoint of value? 

The values have validity. But validity is still too suggestive 
of what is valid for a subject. Exalted as value, the ought was 
again in need of bolstering up. To this end a being was at- 
tributed to the values themselves. A£ bottom this being meant 
neither more nor less than the presence of something already- 
there, though not in so vulgar and handy a sense as chairs 
and tables. With the being of values a maximum of confusion 
and uprootedness was achieved. Since the term “value” was 
gradually beginning to look worn, particularly as it also played 
a part in economic theory, the values were now called “totali- 
ties" (Ganzheiten). But with this term only the letters had 
changed, though it is true that to call them totalities brings 
out their true character as halves, inadequacies ( Halbheiten ). 
But in essential matters halves are more disastrous than the 
so dreaded nothingness. In 1928 there appeared the first part 
of a general bibliography on the concept of value. In it 661 
titles are listed. No doubt the number has meanwhile swollen 
to one thousand. All these works call themselves philosophy. 
The works that are being peddled about nowadays as the phi- 
losophy of National Socialism but have nothing whatever to 
do with the inner truth and greatness of this movement 
(namely the encounter between global technology and mod- 
ern man)—have all been written by men fishing in the trou- 
bled waters of “values” and “totalities.” 

How stubbomly the idea of values ingrained itself in the 
nineteenth century can be seen from the fact that even Nietz- 
sche, and precisely he, never departed from this perspective. 
The subtitle of his projected magnum opus, “The Will to 
Power,” is “An Attempt to Re-evaluate All Values.” The third 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 167 


book is called: “An Attempt to Establish New Values." His 
entanglement in the thicket of the idea of values, his failure 
to understand its questionable origin, is the reason why Nietz- 
sche did not attain to the true center of philosophy. Even if 
a future philosopher should reach this center—we of the pres- 
ent day can only work toward it—he will not escape entangle- 
ment, but it will be a different entanglement. No one can 
jump over his own shadow. 


We have inquired our way through the four distinctions: 
being and becoming, being and appearance, being and think- 
ing, being and the ought. At the beginning of our discussion 
we listed seven points by way of orientation. At first it seemed 
as though we were engaged in a mere exercise of thought, a 
differentiation between terms arbitrarily thrown together. 

We shall now repeat them in the same form and ask our- 
selves: has the discussion maintained the direction indicated 
in these points and has it achieved the insight we were 
seeking? 

1. In these distinctions being is delimited from something 
else and therefore, in this delimitation, already has deter- 
minateness. 

2. It is delimited in four interrelated respects. Therefore 
the determinateness of being must become ramified and in- 
crease accordingly. 

3. These distinctions are by no means accidental. What 
is held apart in them belonged originally together and tends 
to merge. The distinctions therefore have an inner necessity. 

4. Consequently the oppositions, which look at first sight 
like formulas, did not arise fortuitously and find their way 
into the language as figures of speech. They arose in close 
connection with the crucial Western form of being. They be- 
gan with the beginning of philosophical questioning. 

5. Not only have these distinctions remained dominant in 
Western philosophy. They permeate all knowledge, action, 
and discourse even when they are not specifically mentioned 
or not in these words. 

6. The order in which the titles have been listed provides 


168 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


in itself an indication of the order of their essential context 
and of the historical order in which they were moulded. 

7. If one is to ask the question of being radically, one must 
understand the task of unfolding the true essence of being; 
one must come to a decision regarding the powers hidden in 
these distinctions, in order to bring them back to their own 
truth. 

Everything asserted in these points has now been brought 
to view, with the exception of the last point. It alone contains 
a demand. In conclusion we wish to show that it is justified 
and that its fulfillment is necessary. 

To carry out this demonstration we must cast one more 
glance over the whole of this "Introduction to Metaphysics." 

Everything depends on the fundamental question stated at 
the beginning: ^Why are there essents rather than nothing?" 
In order to develop this fundamental question we were com- 
pelled to ask a preliminary question: *How does it stand with 
being?" 

At first "being" struck us as an empty word, its meaning a 
vapor. This seemed to be a demonstrable fact among others. 
But in the end what was seemingly unquestionable and sus- 
ceptible of no further inquiry proved to be the worthiest of 
all questions. Being and the understanding of being are not a 
given fact. Being is the basic happening which first makes pos- 
sible historical being-there amid the disclosure of the essent 
as a whole. 

But we can experience this worthiest and most problematic 
ground of historical being-there in its dignity and rank only 
if we question it. Accordingly, we asked the preliminary ques- 
tion: "How does it stand with being?" 

A look at the familiar but diversified usage of the “is” con- 
vinced us that it is a mistake to talk about the indeterminate- 
ness and emptiness of being. The "is" determines the meaning 
and content of the infinitive "sein" ( being ), and not the other 
way around. We are now in a position to see why this must 
be so. In statement the "is" serves as a copula, as a "little 
word of relation" (Kant). But because statement, logos as 
katégoria, has become a court of judgment over being, it de- 
fines being on the basis of its own “is,” the “is” of statement. 

The being which we took at the start as an empty word 


170 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


the nihilism which Nietzsche exposed in the first book of The 
Will to Power. 

By contrast, to press inquiry into being explicitly to the lim- 
its of nothingness, to draw nothingness into the question of 
being—this is the first and only fruitful step toward a true 
transcending of nihilism. 

The discussion of the four distinctions shows us precisely 
that the inquiry into being as that which is most problematic 
of all must be carried this far. Being is delimited over against 
becoming, appearance, thought, the ought—these are not 
something that has just been dreamed up. They represent 
powers that dominate and bewitch the essent, its disclosure 
and configuration, its closing and disfigurement. Becoming—is 
it nothing? Appearance—is it nothing? Thought—is it nothing? 
The ought—is it nothing? By no means. 

But if all that is opposed to being in the distinctions is not 
nothing, then it is essent and ultimately more so than what is 
regarded as essent in the restricted, current view of being. 
But in what sense of being are becoming and appearing, are 
thinking and the ought essent? Certainly not in the sense of 
the being from which they are distinguished. But this sense of 
being has been the current one ever since antiquity. 

Then the sense of being that has been accepted up until 
now does not suffice to name everything that “is.” 

For this reason being must be experienced anew from the 
bottom up and in all the breadth of its possible essence if we 
are to set our historical being-there to work in a historical 
way. For the powers that oppose being, the differentiations 
themselves, have long determined and dominated our being- 
there; complexly intertwined, they have long beset our being- 
there and held it in confusion with regard to “being.” Thus a 
fundamental inquiry into the four distinctions shows that the 
being which they encircle must itself be transformed into the 
encircling circle and ground of all the essent. The one basic 
differentiation, whose intensity and fundamental cleavage 
sustain history, is the differentiation between being and the 
essent. 

But how is this differentiation to be made? Where can phi- 
losophy begin to think it? Yet here we should not speak of 
a beginning but re-enact it; for it is accomplished, it was ac- 


THE LIMITATION OF BEING 171 


complished in the necessity of the beginning under which we 
still stand. It is not for nothing that in discussing the four dis- 
tinctions we dwelt at disproportionate length on the distinc- 
tion between being and thinking. Today it is still the sustain- 
ing ground, the basis on which being is determined. Thought 
guided by logos as statement has supplied and maintained the 
perspective in which being is seen. 

Thus if being itself is to be disclosed and grounded in ifs 
original differentiation from the essent, an original perspec- 
tive must be opened. The beginnings of the differentiation 
between being and thinking, the divergence between appre- 
hension and being, make it clear that what is at stake is nothing 
less than a humanity, a being-human determined by the es- 
sence of being (physis), that we are trying to open up. 

The question of who man is is closely bound up with the 
question of the essence of being. But the definition of the 
essence of man required here cannot be the product of an 
arbitrary anthropology that considers man in basically the 
same way as zoology considers animals. Here the direction 
and scope of the question of being-human are determined 
solely through the question of being. In accordance with the 
hidden message of the beginning, man should be understood, 
within the question of being, as the site which being requires 
in order to disclose itself. Man is the site of openness, the 
there. The essent juts into this there and is fulfilled. Hence 
we say that man's being is in the strict sense of the word 
*being-there." The perspective for the opening of being must 
be grounded originally in the essence of being-there as such 
a site for the disclosure of being. 

The whole Western view of being, the whole tradition 
and accordingly the relation to being that still prevails, are 
summed up in the heading "being and thought." 

But being and time (Sein und Zeit) is a title that cannot 
in any way be equated with the differentiations we have been 
discussing. It points in an entirely different direction of inquiry. 

Here the ^word" time is not merely substituted for the 
*word" thought; rather, the essence of time, wholly within 
the area of the question of being, is fundamentally deter- 
mined in other respects. 

But why time? Because in the beginning of Western phi- 


172 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


losophy the perspective governing the disclosure of being was 
time, though this perspective as such remained hidden—and 
inevitably so. When ultimately ousia, meaning permanent 
presence, became the basic concept of time, what was the 
unconcealed foundation of permanence and presence if not 
time? But this "time" remained essentially undeveloped and 
(on the basis and in the perspective of “physics”) could not 
be developed. For as soon as reflection on the essence of time 
began, at the end of Greek philosophy with Aristotle, time it- 
self had to be taken as something somehow present, ousia tis. 
Consequently time was considered from the standpoint of the 
“now,” the actual moment. The past is the “no-longer-now,” 
the future is the “not-yet-now.” Being in the sense of already- 
thereness (presence) became the perspective for the deter- 
mination of time. But time was not the perspective specially 
chosen for the interpretation of being. 

In such a reflection I am not referring to my book Sein und 
Zeit but to a problem. The true problem is what we do not 
know and what, insofar as we know it authentically, namely 
as a problem, we know only questioningly. 

To know how to question means to know how to wait, even 
a whole lifetime. But an age which regards as real only what 
goes fast and can be clutched with both hands looks on ques- 
tioning as "remote from reality" and as something that does 
not pay, whose benefits cannot be numbered. But the essen- 
tial is not number; the essential is the right time, i.e. the right 
moment, and the right perseverance. 

“For,” as Hölderlin said, “the mindful God abhors un- 
timely growth.” (“Aus dem Motivkreis der Titanen,” Sámtliche 
Werke, 4, 218.) 


INDEX 


Ab-grund (abyss), 3, 79 

Abyss. See Ab-grund 

Agathon, 164 ff. 

Alétheia, 86, 102, 154-55, 159, 
161 

America, 31, 37; rise of medi- 
Ocrity and sameness in, 38; 
rise of demonism in, 38 

Appearance: rising and setting 
sun as example of, 89; be- 
longs to unconcealment, 160; 
schema of, 162, 164; and be- 
ing, 79, 8o, 83-97; essence 
of, 86, 88; is the incorrect, 
163. See also Appearing 

Appearing: that which offers an 
appearance, 153, 154; that 
which gathers itself, 153, 154. 
See also Appearance 

Apprehension, 167ff., 145; a 
process in which man first en- 
ters into history as a being, 
119; "the happening that has 
man," 119; no mere process, 
140, 141; stands in essential 
kinship with logos, 140, 141- 
45; a struggle with appear- 
ance for being, 141; should so 


disclose essent as to put it back 
in its being, 153. See also 
Noein 

Aquinas, Thomas, 14 

Aristotle, 13, 34, 48, 50, 80, 102, 
105, 115, 143, 150, 155 f., 172 

Art: need for new content, 111; 
stabilizes and manifests be- 
ing, 134. See also Esthetics 


Axynetoi, 109-10 


Beauty, Greek meaning of, 111. 
See also Esthetics 

Becoming: and being, 79, 80, 
81-84; schema of, 162, 164; 
as impermanence, 163; re- 
garded as motion, 163 

Being: forgetfulness of, 15, 16, 
21; hidden from metaphysics, 
15-16; "disclosure of," 16; 
where situated, 25; of essent, 
25 f., 48; cannot be perceived, 
like essents, 27-28; man fallen 
out of, 30; most universal of 
concepts, 33; importance of 
attitude toward, for destiny 
of the West, 35; Greek view 
of, the prevailing Western 


174 


Being (conf'd) 

view, 49; Greek understand- 
ing of, 49-50; for the Greeks, 
meant permanence in twofold 
sense, 53—54; essence of, 63- 
77; distinguished from non- 
being, 65, 66; both determi- 
nate and indeterminate, 66; of 
essent, 25 ff., 48, unique, 66; 
but not itself an essent, 73; 
universality of concept, 66, 
67-68; necessity of appreciat- 
ing pre-eminence of under- 
standing concept, 69-70; finds 
limit only at nothing, 71; all 
questioning of, starts from es- 
sent, 72; must be indetermi- 
nate to be determinable, 76; 
limitation of, 79-172; and be- 
coming, 79, 80, 81-83; and 
appearance (appearing), 79, 
80, 83-97; and the ought, 79, 
81, 164-67; four respects in 
which it is delimited, 80 ff.; 
determinateness of, 80; six 
pointers concerning distinc- 
tions of experience with, 8o— 
81; meaning of, in Greek po- 
etry, 86; truth inherent in es- 
sence of, 86; unconcealment 
the essence of, 89, 91; error 
in relation to, 92; takes on its 
entire interpretation from 
thinking, 98; lost in perspec- 
tive of, 99; essence of man 
out of essence of, 121; and 
being-human, 119, 123; 
Greek, 121; embraces foun- 
dations of being-there, 146; 
as being-set-before, 156; un- 
concealment of, 159ff.; as 
permanent presence, 161; 
schema of, 162, 164; recapitu- 
lation and summary of discus- 


AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


sion of, 167-72; must be ex- 
perienced anew, from bottom 
up, 170; as physis, 50, 85, 86, 
92, 93, 105-6, 117, 136, 142, 
143, 149, 165; as idea, 55, 89, 
150, 153, 155, 165; as logos, 
111, 112, 145; as history, 137. 
See also Essents, question pre- 
liminary to the fundamental 
one 

A WORD: grammar, 43-58; 
etymology, 58-61; word forms 
worked out in connection 
with, 47; in Greek, einai, 56; 
emptiness of, 57, 61; “is” as 
word form in discourse, 74— 
77; as a substantive, 79 ff.; 
ousia now the decisive term 
for, 162, 163-64. See also 
Enklisis, Infinitive 

MEANINGS OF THE WORD: 
an unreal vapor, 29-30, 31, 
32, 33, 35, 41, 42, 57, 61, 68, 
69, 72; three initial concrete, 
59; importance of knowing, 
65; without a meaning, no 
language possible, 69; neces- 
sity of questioning, 70; raised 
as question for first time in 
philosophy, 70; relation of 
language and, 73 ff. 

QUESTION OF: considered as 
a repetition of the question of 
essents, 14-15, or preliminary 
to it, 27; involves us in ques- 
tion of language, 43 

AND THINKING, 79, 80-81, 
98-164; importance of dis- 
tinction between, 98—99; sep- 
aration of, 103 f., 122, 150- 
63; opposition between, 114, 
119, 163; being is to thinking 
as object is to subject, 114 


INDEX 


Being-human, 137, 139; gather- 
ing is the ground of, 146; es- 
sence of, 146; grounded in dis- 
closure of being of essent, 146 

Being-there, 24, 39, 52, 69, 111, 
112, 126, 128, 136, 144, 148- 
49; philosophy emphasizes 
meaning and goals of, 8; func- 
tion of philosophy to chal- 
lenge, 9; existential-ecstatic 
temporality of human, 15; 
qualified by “in every case 
mine," 23-24; restoration of 
man's and of our own, 34; his- 
torical, 35f., 41, 65, 79 f£, 
90, 137-38, 148, 149; Greek, 
90, 91, 121-22, 155, Oedipus 
the embodiment of, 90; West- 
ern, dominated by "idea" and 
"category," 158. Ent-borgen- 
heit: see Willing to know. See 
also Dasein 

Bible, 6 


Categorical imperative, 165 

Catholicism, dogma of, 120 

Chora, 55 

Christianity, 11, 147, 162; set- 
tled into abyss between ap- 
parent essent and real being, 
go; responsible for the misin- 
terpretation of Heraclitus, 107 

Claudius, Matthias, 85 

Communism, 40 

Conflict, original, 51 


Dasein (being-there), x, xi, 8 
and n. See also Being-there 
Deinon, deinotaton, 125-39 pas- 

sim 
Descartes, René, 163 
Diké, 134, 136, 138 ff. 
Discourse, fundamental rule of, 
19 


175 


Eidos, 50, 151, 152, 165 

Eigenstándig (self-standing), 59 

Einai (being), 56, 57 

End, as "that wherewith the es- 
sent begins to be," 5o 

Enklisis, 48, 49, 53, 54, 92; 
paremphatikos, 54, 55; apar- 
emphatikos, 55, 56 

Entelecheia, 50 

Ent-stehen — (standing-out-of), 
52 

Environment (Umwelt), 37 

Error, area of, in relation to be- 
ing, 92 

Essence: of metaphysics, 14; of 
spirit, 40—41; of language, 44, 
in act of gathering, 145; of 
substantive, 46 ff.; of appear- 
ance, 86, 88-89; of being, 86; 
of thinking (logos), 104; of 
man, 118, 171, inner design 
of man’s, 125-29; of being, 
man out of, 121; of being- 
human, 146-47; ambiguous- 
ness of concept, 153-54; of 
truth, 157-58, 159 

Essent: philosophy aims at first 
and last grounds of, 8; called 
physis by Greeks, 11, 13-14; 
Greek narrowing of meaning, 
13; truth is the manifestness 
of, 17, 18; wavers between 
being and nonbeing, 23-25; 
two meanings, 25-26; being 
of, 26ff., 48, difficulty of 
grasping, 27, uniqueness, 66, 
reinterpreted by Christianity, 
162; ground of, 26, ques- 
tioned, 22; to telos (end) a 
fundamental characteristic, 
49-50; becomes such only 
after the physis, 51; becomes 
object during original con- 
flict, 52; essentness of, 57; no 


176 


Essent (cont'd) 
help from verbal forms of "to 
be,” 57-58; uncritical accept- 
ance of, 64-65; particular, 
67-68, 72; all questioning of 
being starts from, 72; “being 
and the ought” the determiner 
of one of dominant attitudes 
of modern spirit toward, 81; 
man as, 117; disclosure of, in 
Antigone, 132; the idea con- 
stitutes the, 152; brings con- 
flict into being, 154; held to 
have been created by God, 
162; is what stands up to cor- 
rect thinking, 162. See also 
Being, Essentia, Essents, Ex- 
istentia, Ground, and Trans- 
lator’s Note, ix—xi 

Essentia, 151, 154 

Essents, the fundamental ques- 
tion of (Why are there es- 
sents rather than nothing?): 
when we ask it, 1; three rea- 
sons why it is important, 2-3, 
5; concerned with no particu- 
lar essent, not even particu- 
larly with man, 3-4; a “privi- 
leged happening,” an event, 
4; “why the why” not a friv- 
olous repetition, 4-5; ground 
of, 4-5, 19, is in a leap from 
security, 5, such a leap the 
finding of one's own ground, 
5; opens the ground for all 
authentic questions, 5; broad- 
est and deepest question be- 
cause most fundamental, and 
conversely, 5; question of all 
questions, 5; biblical answer 
to, 6; actually related to, 6; 
linguistic formulation of, 
broad and loose, 19; develop- 
ment of, 18 ff.; limitation to 


AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


first half of, 19-20; misun- 
derstanding of, 20-21; impor- 
tance of second half, 22-23; 
question preliminary to the 
fundamental one (How does 
it stand with being?), 26-28, 
30, 32, 34ff., 61, 79, 168, a 
historical question, 35-42; a 
hidden ground of historical 
being-there, 79 

Esthetics, 111. See also Art 

Etymology, of the word “be- 
ing,” 43-61 

Europe: caught between Russia 
and America, 31-32, 35, 37, 
38; increasing helplessness 
and uncertainty of, 38 

Existasthai, 53 

Existence, meant “nonbeing” for 
Greeks, 53 

Existent, x 

Existentia, 151, 154 


Faith: philosophy a foolishness 
for Christianity, 6; conse- 
quences of asking the funda- 
mental question of essents on, 
6. See also Christianity, The- 
ology 

Fichte, J. G., 165 

Form (morphé), 50 

Fraenkel, Ernst, 43 n. 

Frankfurter Zeitung, 120 

Fug, 134, 135, 137, 139, 142, 
143 

Fundamental question. See. Es- 
sents, Metaphysics 


German language, with Greek 
the most powerful and spirit- 
ual, 47 

Germany, historical mission of, 
31-32, 35, 41 


INDEX 


Glory, doxa, in Greek thinking, 
87-88 

Good, the, 164 

Grammar: of the word “being,” 
43-61; formal terms of, now 
incomprehensible shells, 43- 
44; arose from reflection of 
Greeks on their own language, 
47; represents language in be- 
ing, 53 

Greek(s), 123, physis their word 
for essent, 11, 13; inadequacy 
of translations from, 11, phi- 
losophy of, 14, 158, begins 
and ends in greatness, 13, mis- 
interpretation of, 116-17; lan- 
guage, with German the most 
powerful and spiritual, 47; 
differentiation of fundamen- 
tal word forms (onoma and 
rhéma), 47-48; “existence” 
meant “nonbeing” for, 53; ex- 
perience of space, 55; being 
and appearance in poetry of, 
86, 87-97; glory in thinking 
of, 87-88; meaning of beauty 
for, 111; being-there, 121; 
view of being, 121-22; now 
the prevailing Western view, 
49, as standing there, 49, in 
appointed essence of being, 
87; concept of being-human, 
123 ff.; basically both optimis- 
tic and pessimistic, 149. See 
also Physis, Techné, and 
names of Greek dramatists 
and philosophers 

Ground: the fundamental ques- 
tion (see Essents) seeks, 169- 
70; primal (Ur-grund), 3; 
abyss (Ab-grund), 3; non- 
ground (Un-grund), 3; “un- 
derlying” realms (“zu-grunde” 
liegend), 3; the “leap” of the 


177 


fundamental question opens 
up its own, 5, 19; first and 
last, of the essent, 8; of what 
is, sought by philosophy, 20; 
of logic, in answer to the fun- 
damental question, 20-21; of 
essent, questioned, 22, 26; of 
decision for the essent as op- 
posed to nothingness, 23; hid- 
den, of historical being-there, 
93 


Hamsun, Knut, The Road Leads 
On, Vagabonds, and August, 
22 

Hegel, G. W. F., 14, 102, 103, 
106, 107, 151, 157 ff. 

“Heideggerian method,” 147 

Heraclitus, 51, 82, 83, 88, 96, 
106, 109, 111, 114, 118, 121, 
139, 143, 148, 160; interpre- 
tations of, 106-13 

Historical science, 35 

History, 351L; in authentic 
sense, is world-building, 51; 
happens only where being dis- 
closes itself in questioning, 
121; being as, 137; historical 
necessity, 148. See also Being- 
there, historical 

Hölderlin, Friedrich, 90-91, 
106-7, 172 

Homer, 144; language of, 56; 
Odyssey, 105 


Idea (idea), 89, 150-51; being 
as, 55; physis as, 150-51, 161; 
meaning of word, 150-51; 
constitutes the essent, 152; as 
sole and decisive interpreta- 
tion of being, 152; Logos as, 
158; and category, two terms 
that dominate Western being- 
there, 158; opposite of ap- 


178 AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


Idea (cont'd) 
pearance, 163; of the good, 
164; the supreme, 164 ff. 
Idealism, 115; German, collapse 
of, 37 
Infinitive, 45-46, 48, 63, 72; 
blurring of, 53-54, 55-56, 72; 
verbal substantive, 57, 61. See 
also Enklisis 
Inquiry, 18 
In-sich-stehen 
self), 52 
Intellectualism, 103 
Isocrates, 162 


(standing-in-it- 


Kant, Immanuel, 34, 102, 115, 
157-58, 165, 168 

Knowing, definition and process 
of, 17, 18 

Knowledge, 17-18 


Language: question of being in- 
volves us in question of, 42; 
misuse of, 42; determination 
of its essence regulated by 
preconception of being, 44; 
Greek and Latin, 44; German 
and Greek the most powerful 
and spiritual, 47; in being, 
represented by grammar, 53; 
the grammatical view of, cru- 
cial, 53; of Homer, 56; impos- 
sible without a meaning for 
being, 69; relation of being 
and, 73 f.; origin, 143-44; as 
logos, 144; essence of, in act 
of gathering, 145; custodian 
of the essent, 155 

Learning, 17-18 

Legein, 108, 141, 142, 143, 145, 
146, 148, 156; meaning of, 
105 

Leibniz, G. W. von, 50, 102 

Logic, 19, 20-21; meaning of 


word, 101; beginning of, 102- 
3; not changed since Aristotle, 
157 


Logos (logos), 48, 51, 138, 140; 


as statement, 101, 103, 156 f., 
161, 163; essence of thinking, 
104; meaning of word, 104~ 
5; Christian, 107 f., 113; in 
Heraclitus, 106-13; perma- 
nence and endurance charac- 
teristics of, 108; everything 
that comes into being does so 
in accordance with, 108; 
meaning of, 108; the togeth- 
erness of the essent, 108, 109- 
10; as togetherness, 113; as 
collectedness, 108-9, 145; 
original collecting collected- 
ness, 108; being as, 111, 145; 
sarma the antithesis of, 112- 
13; as Christ, 113; as physis, 
113, 114, 143, 145, 157 
(unity between physis and, 
104; law governing separation 
of physis and, 114; moves 
apart from physis, 149, 150; 
relation between physis and, 
at end of Greek philosophy, 
150-51; reason for this 
change, 158-62); in Greek 
translation of the Old Testa- 
ment, 113-14; essential foun- 
dation of language, 140, 144, 
145; as gathering, 142, 1406, 
155, 161; as need, 146; as 
legein, opposes physis, 146; 
as idea, 158 


Lohmann, Johannes, 43 n. 


Man: unimportance of, in uni- 


verse of space and time, 4; 
time impossible without, 71; 
opinionatedness of, prevents 
knowledge of being, 110; as 


INDEX 


Man (cont'd) 

essent, 117; essence of, 118, 
171 (a question not an an- 
swer, 120; out of essence of 
being, 121; inner design of 
essence of, 125-29); what he 
is, linked to question of how 
it stands with being, 118; de- 
fined as the rational animal, 
119; loss of power to ques- 
tion, 120-21; “Who is he?" 
not “What is he?", 121, in 
Antigone, 125-26; “strangest 
of all,” 126 ff. 

Marxism, 38 

Metaphysics: physics determines 
essence and history of, 14; the 
fundamental question of, 1 f., 
14, 16-17, 18-20, 26, 27 fÈ., 
60, 71, 79, 168 (see also Es- 
sents); the pivotal point and 
core of all philosophy, 14; an 
inquiry into the essent as such, 
15; meaning of “introduction” 
to, 16; not a science, 35-36 
Morality. See Ought 

Motion, in terms of velocity, 
163; becoming regarded as, 
163 


179 


160 

Nothing: in second half of the 
fundamental question, 103-4; 
evil of speaking about, 19, 20; 
question about, asked by phi- 
losophy, 20; meaning of, 21- 
24; "something," in one sense, 
33; path to, 93, 95. See also 
Ground 


Onoma, 47—48 

Ontology, 33-34, 157; funda- 
mental, 146 

Ought: and being, 79, 81, 164- 
67; schema of the, 164 

Ousia, 53, 159, 161 f., 172 


Paremphaino, 54, 55 

Parmenides, 81-82, 83, 85, 93- 
95, 106, 116 ££, 119 ff., 158, 
160; logos in, 115-17; maxim 
of, 115, 116, 121-22, 123, 
138, 139, 145, 153; interpre- 
tation of maxim, 140 ff. 

Parousia, 50 

Path, threefold, to being, noth- 
ing, and appearance, 95 

Phainesthai, 52 

Philo, 113 

Philosophy: Christian, a mis- 


National Socialism, 166 

Nietzsche, Friedrich, 3n., 10, 
11, 14, 29, 30, 32, 90, 106, 
166-67, 170 

Nihilism, 169 

Noein, 115, 116, 119-20, 139, 
141, 142, 145, 148, 161. See 
also Apprehension 

Nonbeing, 23 ff., 68; for Greeks 
existence meant, 53; impor- 
tance of knowing meaning of, 
65; meaning of, 87; path to, 
in Parmenides, 93-94 

Not (German word), 142, 146, 


oL 


understanding, 6; Greek, 158; 
begins and ends in greatness, 
13; misinterpretation, 115; to 
philosophize is to ask the 
fundamental question, 6-7; 
cannot be directly learned or 
applied, 7; essentially un- 
timely, 7; what it cannot be 
or accomplish, 7; two current 
misinterpretations, 8-10; what 
it can and must be, 9; never 
directly concerned with his- 
torical change, 8; aims at first 
and last grounds of the essent, 


180 


Philosophy (cont'd) 
8; erroneously expected to 
promote culture, 9; its history 
not the thing itself, 9; func- 
tion of, to challenge historical 
being-there, 9; seeks ground 
of what is, 20; prior in rank 
to science, 21; of Nietzsche, 
29—30; not a science, 35; de- 
termines essence and history 
of metaphysics, 14 

Physis, 51, 52, 59, 102, 116, 138, 
139; Greek word for essent, 
11, 14; denotation, 11-12; 
Greek narrowing of term, 13; 
being as, 50, 85, 86, 92, 93, 
106, 117, 136, 143, 165; the 
essence of being, 86; law gov- 
erning separation of being 
and, 114; as togetherness of 
being, 142; degenerates into 
a prototype, 52; Ent-stehen, 
52; logos as, 113, 114, 143, 
145, 158; unity of logos and, 
104; logos moves apart from, 
149, 150; relation between 
logos and, at end of Greek 
philosophy, 150-58; reason 
for this change, 158-62; came 
to be called idea, 150-51, 161 

Pindar, 86, 87, 96 

Plato, 14, 34, 47, 80, 89-90, 
102-3, 115, 143, 150, 151, 
154, 164; Timaeus, 54, 55 

Poetry: thinking in, 121-22; ini- 
tiates molding of language, 
144 

Polemos, 51, 121 

Polis, 128, 160 

Positivism, 39 

Power, 129-33 

Pragma, 48 

Praxis, 48 

Ptosis, 48-49, 53 


AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


Question, fundamental. See Es- 
sents, Metaphysics 

Questioning, nature and process 
of, 15-17, 24-25 


Rationalism, vs. irrationalism, 
149-50, 162 

Real, 21, vs. unreal, 98 

Realism, 115 


Reinhardt, Karl, 91 

Rektoratsrede, 41 

Rhéma, 47 

Rouse, W. H. D., 105 

Russia, 31, 37; rise of medioc- 
rity and sameness in, 38; rise 
of demonism in, 38; Russian 
Communism, 40 


Sarma, 112-13 

Schein, 84; three modes of, 85; 
unconcealment of essent, 88— 
89 

Scholasticism, 151 

Schools, should have spiritual, 
not scientific, atmosphere, 44 

Schopenhauer, Arthur, 52, 149 

Science, 91; two conceptions of, 
both emasculating spirit, 39- 
40; scientific thinking, 21-22 

Seiendes, x 

Sein, x, 45-46, 57; three differ- 
ent radical meanings of, 58— 
59, 61; three stems in inflec- 
tion of, 58-59, 72; work of 
abstraction in formation of 
word, 59, 60; blunted, indefi- 
nite meaning of, 61, 63; sum- 
mation of discussion of, 61. 
See also Being, Infinitive 

Sein und Zeit, 15, 16, 17, 24, 
30, 34, 70, 90, 143, 146, 155, 
171, 172 

Sophists, 89 


INDEX 


Sophocles: Antigone, 123-39, 
143; Oedipus in Colonus, 148; 
Oedipus Rex, 90-91 

Space, Greek experience of, 54 

Spirit: world of, 37 ff.; four as- 
pects of misinterpretation of, 
38-41; falsified as intelli- 
gence, 38-41; essence of, 40— 


41 
Spiritual decline, of the earth, 

30-31, 37 f. 
Standing-in-itself, 86 
Substantive, essence of, 46 ff. 


Techné, 13-14, 133 ff., 139 É., 
142 

Theology, definition, 6 

Thinking (thought): scientific, 
21-22; and being, 79, 80-81, 
98-165; importance of dis- 
tinction between being and, 
98—99; separation from being, 
150—62; origin of separation, 
103 ff., 122; opposition be- 
tween being and, 114, 119, 
163; usage and meanings of 
word, 99-100; depth of, based 
on three re-presentations, 100; 
and logic, 101 ff.; schema of, 
162, 164 

'Time, 171; in the modern West- 
em world, 31-32; impossible 
without man, 71 

To on, 25 

Topos (place), 55, 56 

Transcendental horizon, 15 

Tree, universal concept of, as 
example of meaning of "be- 
ing," 67 

Truth: definition, 17; inherent 
in essence of being, 86-87; as 
unconcealment, 87, 90; es- 
sence of, transformed from un- 
concealment to correctness, 


181 


158, 159 


Unconcealment: meaning cor- 
rectness, 159 ff.; achieved by 
work, 160 

Un-grund (non-ground), 3 

Unity, meaning of, 117 

Universality, of concept of be- 
ing, 66, 67-68 

Universals, vs. particulars, 67 

Ur-grund (primal ground), 3 

Ur-sprung (source of origin), 5 


Value, concept of, 165-67 

Verb: essence of, 46 ff.; mean- 
ing in inflection of, 53. See 
also Grammar, Greek, Infini- 
tive, Language, Substantive 

Vernehmen, Vernehmung, 116, 
118, 140 

Violence, 129-35, 144, 148 

Vision, degenerates into mere 
optics, 52 

Vom Wesen der Wahrheit, 17 


Wackernagel, 56 

Was ist Metaphysik?, 40 

West: asking question of being 
the crux of spiritual history 
of, 72; doctrine of man in, 
119; thinking in beginning of 
philosophy of, 104; being as 
idea in philosophy of, 151; 
spirit, fundamental position 
of, in distinction between be- 
ing and thinking, 98-99 

Willing to know: vs. wishing, 
i7;  Ent-schlossenheit, 17; 
Ent-borgenheit, 17 

Words: fundamental forms of, 
worked out in connection with 
being, 47; two kinds (revela- 


182 AN 


Words (cont'd) 
tion of things and of action), 
48 

World, darkening of, 37; from 
conflict, 51 


INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS 


“World eye” (cognition), 52 


"Zu-grunde" liegend (“under- 
lying" realms), 3 


A 


PHILOSOPHY 


An Introduction to 


Metaphysics 


Mine ITI S A n] 
Martin 


Heidegger 


Martin Heidegger, the man often called the “father of 
German existentialism,” presents in this book a pro- 
found and original examination of the problem he re- 
gards as “the crux of the spiritual history of the West” 
—the problem of being. “Is being only an empty word?” 
he asks. The answer he puts forth, after guiding us 
through two millennia of man’s thought on the ques- 
tion, is no, it is not an empty word, or, rather, it should 
not be an empty word. But, he warns, language through 
the ages has been worn out and used up, and the most 
crucial casualty is “being,” the word without which we 
should have no language at all. Heidegger combines 
a talent for understanding the most modern—indeed, 
the most futuristic — questions of philosophy with a 
broad and tolerant grasp of the teachings of the past, 
a combination that enables him to recall for us the 
forgotten “ontological” truths of such men as those 
two “inaugurators of all philosophy,” Parmenides and 
Heraclitus. What Martin Heidegger has given us is not 
an introduction in the sense of a primer; it is a "lead- 
ing into," a guide down the deepest corridors of philos- 
ophy to the very heart of the matter—the question of 


being. 


qu A DOUBLEDAY ANCHOR BOOK 


962-MVV-4M /2 


