Martin Heidegger 

PARMENIDES 


Translated by 
Andre Schuwer and 
Richard Rojcewicz 


Indiana University Press 


BLOOMINGTON AND INDIANAPOLIS 



Published in German as Parmenides 
® 1982 by Vittono Klostermann, Frankfurt am Main 

1992 by Indiana University Press 

Ail nghts reserved 

No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage 
and retneval system, without permission in wnting from the publisher. The Association 
of Amencan University Presses' Resolution on Permissions constitutes the only exception 

to this prohibition 

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements 
of Amencan National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper 
for Pnnted Library Matenals, ANSI Z39 48-1984 

Manufactured in the United States of Amenca 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Heidegger, Martin, 1889-1976 
[Parmenides English] 

Parmenides / Martin Heidegger , translated by Andr^ Schuwer and 
Richard Rojcewicz 

p cm — (Studies in Continental thought) 

TVanslation of Parmenides, based on a lecture course given 
1942-43 at the University of Freiburg 
Includes bibliographical references 
ISBN 0-253-32726-1 (alk paper) 

1 Parmenides 2 Philosophy 1 Title 11 Senes 
B3279 H48P3713 1992 

182' 3—dc20 91-19431 


1 2 3 4 5 96 


95 94 93 92 



Contents 


TRANSLATORS' FOREWORD xiii 

Introduction 

Preparatory meditation on the name and the word dAqdeia and its counter¬ 
essence Two directives from the translating word aAqdeia 1 

§1. The goddess "truth." Parmenides, I, 22-32. 1 

a) Ordinary acquaintance and essential knowing. Renuncia¬ 
tion of the prevalent interpretation of the “didactic poem" 

by heeding the claim of the beginning. 1 

RECAPITULATION 

1) Outset and beginning. Ordinary thinking and the think¬ 
ing begun by the beginning. Retreating in face of Being. 

The few and simple texts. Reference to "translating " 6 

b) Two directives from the translating word dAqdeia. The 

conflictual character of unconcealedness. Preliminary clar¬ 
ification of the essence of dAqdeia and of concealedness. 
Transporting and translating [U hersetzen —Uiersetzen]. 10 

RECAPITULATION 

2) The question of the name of the goddess and how to 
translate it. The essence of truth as opposed to concealed¬ 
ness, according to the first two directives. Vn-concealedness 

and Un-concealedness. 14 


PART ONE 

The third directive from the translating word dAijdeia the realm of the 
opposition between dAi]deia and At]dri in the history of Being 17 

§2. First meditation on the transformation of the essence of truth and 

of its counter-essence. 17 

a) The conflictual character of un-concealedness. The third 
directive: truth in oppositional relations. The resonance 
of dAqdEia in subjectivity. Reference to Hegel and Schel- 


V 



Vl 


Contents 


ling. Directive toward the oppositions between conceal¬ 
edness and unconcealedness, falsity and truth. 17 

b) The question of the counter-essence of aAqdeq. The ab¬ 
sence of Aqdeu the if/euSoq. The veiling of basic mean¬ 
ings. The counter-word Tafldv; Aavdavopai thought in the 
Greek way. Forgetting as experienced on the basis of con¬ 
cealment. Homer, Iliad, XVlll, 46; X, 22; Odyssey, Vlll, 

93. 20 

RECAPITULATION 

To ifjEvSoq as the opposite of dAqdeq. The relationship be¬ 
tween the stems of the words dAqdeia and Aavdavo). Refer¬ 
ence to Homer, Odyssey, Vlll, 93. The withdrawal of 
forgetting. 25 

§3. Clarification of the transformation of dAqdeia and of the transfor¬ 
mation of its counter-essence fveritas, certitudo, rectitude, 
iustitia, truth, justice — Aqdq, if/tuSot;, falsum, incorrectness, fal¬ 
sity). 28 

a) The intrinsically different meanings of if/tvSoc; and 
“false." The essential domain of the counter-word if/ev- 
(5oc as letting-appear while covering up. Reference to 
Homer, Iliad, B 348ff. Dissembling concealment: the basic 
meaning of qjEvSoq. I'd dqiEvdEq: the "dis-hiding," and 
the dAqddq. Reference to Hesiod, Theogony, Verse 233f. 

The ambiguity of dAqddq. 29 

RECAPITULATION 

1) The so-called correct translation of ifjtvSoqhy "false." The 
manifold meanings of "false" and if/Ev8o<;. The dissem¬ 
bling and hiding of i/jeuSch; in the region of the essence 
of concealment and unveiledness. Reference to Homer 

and Hesiod. 35 

b) The un-German word "false." Falsum, fallo, oepdAAo). The 

Roman priority of "overthrowing" in the Latinization of 
ancient Greece through the impenum (command) as essen¬ 
tial ground of iustiim. The transporting of qiEvdoq into 
the Roman-imperial domain of overthrowing. The real 
event of history: the assault of Latinizing in the Greek- 
Roman domain of history and the modern view of the 
Greek world through Roman eyes. 39 

RECAPITULATION 

2) Reconsideration of the essence of the "false" and of the 

hiding and "dis-hiding" of qjEvtioc;. The rule of the 
Roman imperial "high command" and the breadth of the 
distinction between qiEvdcx; and falsum. 43 



Contents 


Vll 


c) The imperial in the form of the curial of the curia. The 
connection between verum and “true." The un-German 
meaning of “true" through the Roman-Christian verum. 

Verum: the established right as counter-word to falsum. 

Verum and aperlum; Aadov and its counterpart to aAqdeq. 45 

d) The transformation of the essence of dAqdeia since Plato. 

The assumption of the "representation" of dAqdeia 
through dfioi'cjou; (as rectitude of ratio) into ventas. Rectitude 
(iustitia) of ecclesiastical dogmatics and the iustificatio of 
evangelical theology. The certum and the usus rectus (Des¬ 
cartes). Reference to Kant. The closing of the ring of the 
history of the essence of truth in the transformation of 
ventas into "justice" (Nietzsche). The incarceration of aAq- 

’deia in the Roman bastion of ventas, rectitude, and iustitia. 49 

RECAPITULATION 

3) The sending [das Geschicht] of the assignment of Being: 

retrospective consideration of the history of the transfor¬ 
mation of the essence of truth. The "balances" of history 
(Burckhardt, Nietzsche, Spengler). The historical "confer¬ 
ral of meaning" in the modern period. 54 

4) The event of the conversion of the essence of untruth from 

the Greek ipevScx; to the Roman falsum. The fulfillment 
of the transformation of ventas into certitude in the nine¬ 
teenth century. The self-assurance of self-certainty (Nie¬ 
tzsche, Fichte, Hegel). 57 

§4. The multiplicity of the oppositions to unconcealedness in its essen¬ 
tial character. 58 

a) The rich essence of concealedness. Modes of concealing: 
anarq, (pidoScx;),xevd(e, xpvnro), xaAvmo). Homer, Iliad, 

XX, 118; Odyssey, VI. 303; HI, 16; Iliad, XXlll, 244. The 
disclosive power of muthes and the question of the Greek 
divinities. 58 

b) The connection between pvdex; and the Greek deities. 

Earth, day, night, and death in relation to unconcealed¬ 
ness. The mysterious as one of the modes of concealment. 
Rejection of the negativity in falsity and in dissembling 

as the one and only counter-essence to the truth. 61 

RECAPITULATION 

Supplementary clarification: the "way" of the arriving 
thinker in the "didactic poem." The connection between the 
essence of the goddess and the ways toward and from her 
home. By-way and off-way. The question of the other 
counter-essence to disclosedness. The essence of disclosure 
and concealment as expressed in word and legend. The loss 



viii 


Contents 


of the word in its preservation of the relation of Being to 
man. The Roman transformation of to ^wov Adyov into 
"animal" rationale. Reference to Kant, Nietzsche, Spengler. 

Mvdo(; encx; Aoyoc;. 65 

§5. The opposite to aAqdeq: Aadov, Aadeq. The event of the transfor¬ 
mation of the withdrawing concealment and the human behavior 
of forgetting. 1 1 

a) The prevailing of concealment in Aavdaveodai. The con¬ 

cealment of the forgetter in the forgotten: oblivion. He¬ 
siod, Theogony, V. 226f. Ai]di] and the hidden essence of 
Eris (Strife), the daughter of the night. Reference to 
Pindar. 71 

b) Awe in Pindar, Olympic Ode Vll, 48f.; 43ff.; and in Soph¬ 
ocles, Oedipus at Colonus, 1267. ’Aperi] (resoluteness) as 
the disclosedness of man, determined on the basis of dAq- 

"deia and ai8(bq. 74 

RECAPITULATION 

1) The three titles of the essential history of the Occident. 
Reference to Being and Time. Essential thinking. Reference 
to Holderlin and Pindar. The beginning of the essential 
relation of Being to man in word and legendary word. 

The Greek essence of man. Reference to Hesiod. 76 

c) Ilpaypa: action. The word as the realm of the essence 
of the human hand. Handwriting and typewriting. 

'Opdog and rectum. Essential action and the way toward 
the unconcealed. Oblivion as concealment. Man's being 
"away" from unconcealedness, and the word of the sign¬ 
less cloud. Darkening. The withdrawal of Aqdq. Reference 

to Pindar and Hesiod. 79 

RECAPITULATION 

2) The correlation between being, word, gathering, hand, 
and writing. The irruption of the typewriter into the realm 
of the word and of handwriting. The consequence of tech¬ 
nology within the transformed relation of Being to man. 
Bolshevism: the pre-arranged completely technically or¬ 
ganized world. The thinking and poetry of the Greeks 

as regards dAqdeia and Aqdq. 84 

§6. The Greeks' final word concerning the hidden counter-essence of 
dcArjdeia, Arjdq, (I): The concluding myth of Plato's PoUteia. The 
myth of the essence of the polis. Elucidation of the essence of the 
demonic. The essence of the Greek gods in the light of dAqdeia. 

The "view" of the uncanny. 88 

a) The noAig, the pole of the presence of beings as deter¬ 
mined out of dAqdeia. Reference to Sophocles. The rever¬ 
beration of the conflictual essence of dAqdeia in the 



Contents 


IX 


counter-essence to n6\i<;'. ano\i<;. Reference to Burck- 
hardt. 88 

b) Preparation for a detour over the path of a commentary 
on Plato's dialogue on Xr]dr] and the noXiq. Order: Ai'xq. 

The mortal course of the sojourn in the polis and the pres¬ 
ence of beings after death. Christian Platonism. Reference 

to Hegel. 91 

RECAPITULATION 

1) Politeia: the Tonoqof the essence of the noXit;. The essen¬ 

tially unpolitical character of the politeia of the polis. The 
pole of neXeiv. The impossibility of interpreting the polis 
on the basis of the "state," Ai'xq, and iustitia. Death: transi¬ 
tion from "here" to "there." Platonism. 94 

c) The question of the "here" and "there." Politeia, X, 614b2, 

and the questionableness of this "reference" to the myth. 97 

d) Wuxi]- the ground of a relation to beings. The thinker's 
knowledge of the daimonia. Reference to Aristotle and 
Hegel. Aaipoviov: the presence of the uncanny, the ex¬ 
traordinary, in the ordinary. The Sai'poveq, the ones who 

point to and indicate what is ordinary. 99 

e) The looking (fledw) that offers the sight of Being. The out¬ 

ward look (sight) of Being {eiSot;). The Greek god 
(Sai'iKov) that in looking presents itself in unconcealed¬ 
ness. What looks into the ordinary: the extraordinary, the 
uncanny. The appearance of the uncanny in human 
looking. 102 

RECAPITULATION 

2) The undemonic of the Saifiovet;. The disclosing emer¬ 
gence of Being: the self-clearing. Looking (perceiving), 
the primordial mode of the emergence into the light. The 
intermediate position of the animal (Nietzsche, Spengler). 

Man: the looked upon. 0eaand dea: the same word. Ref¬ 
erence to Heraclitus, Fragment 48. Insufficient elucidation 
of the Greek divinities. The look as what is decisive for 
the appearance of the uncanny within the ordinary. The 
uncanny as showing itself within the ordinary, and its 
relation, founded on Being, to the divinities. 105 

0 The difference between the Greek gods and the Christian 
God. The word as naming Being in its looking-into, and 
myth as a mode of the relation to appearing Being. Man: 
the God-sayer. "Decline" of cultures (Nietzsche, Speng¬ 
ler). The basic character of the oblivion of being: 
A-theism. 110 

g) The divine as it enters into the unconcealed. The daimo- 
nion: the look in its silent reception into the appurtenance 
to Being. The disclosive domain of the word. The "corre- 



X 


Contents 


spondencc” of the divine and legend-ary (to da'ov and 
6 /jodoe)- The setting into work (art) of unconcealedness 
and its medium of word and myth. EvSaifiovi'a and 
Saipovtoc; Tonoq. 114 

§7. The Greeks' final word concerning the hidden counter-essence of 
dXqdeia, Xqdq (II). The concluding myth of Plato's Politeia. The 
field of Xqdt]. 

a) The district of the uncanny: the field of withdrawing con¬ 
cealment. The exclusiveness of the uncanny in the place 
of lethe. The sight of its emptiness, and the nothingness 
of the withdrawal. The uncontainable water of the river 
"Carefree" in the field of Xqdq. The saving of the uncon¬ 
cealed by thoughtful thinking; the drink of the thinker. 

RECAPITULATION 

1) Field and lethe. The divine for the Greeks: the uncanny 
in the ordinary. The deiov in primordial aXqdeia and 
Xqdq. 'AXqdeia and dea (Parmenides). 

b) The measure of withdrawing concealment in uncon¬ 
cealedness. The countenance of the iSea in Plato and the 
grounding of anamnesis (as well as forgetting) in uncon¬ 
cealedness. Aqdq: neSiov. The interpretation of the begin¬ 
ning of Homer's poems and of Parmenides' utterance. The 
unforgetting of dXqdeia through the withdrawal of Xqdq. 

The overcoming of experience since Plato through proce¬ 
dural operations (zexvq). Reference to Homer, Iliad, 

XXIH, 358fT. 

RECAPITULATION 

2) The origination of man out of the uncanny district of 
withdrawing concealment. The inception of the transfor¬ 
mation of man's basic position. The coming to presence 
together of dXqdeia and pe/jv/j/ja/. Reference to Homer, 

Iliad XXllI, 358ff. 129 


PART TWO 

The fourth directive from the translating word dXqdeia The open and free 
space of the clearing of Being The goddess "truth " 131 

§8. The fuller significance of dis-closure. The transition to subjectivity. 

The fourth directive: the open, the free. The event of dXqdeia 
in the West. The groundlessness of the open. The alienation of 
man. 131 

a) Preparation for the fourth directive. The insufficiency of 
"unconcealedness" as the translation used up to now. The 
ambiguity of the word "dis-closure" and its fuller signifi- 



118 


118 



Contents 


XI 


cance. The conflict in primordial aAqdeia. Proximity and 
beginning. Reference to Homer. The two senses of appear¬ 
ance: pure emergence and being-encountered. Egohood. 
Reference to Kant, Descartes, Herder, Nietzsche. The pri¬ 
ority of selfhood since Plato and Aristotle (flEpi 
8, 431; Met a, 1). 131 

b) The fourth directive: the open as the primordial essence 
of unconcealedness. Reference to Being and time and Soph¬ 
ocles, Aiag V, 646f. Time as letting appear and concealing. 
Reference to Holderlin. Time as “factor” in the modern 
period. The upsurge of the open into unconcealedness. 

The "identification" of openness and freedom. ’AAqdeia 

as the open of the clearing. 140 

c) Light and looking. The "natural" explanation of truth as 

lighting in terms of the "visual" Greeks, versus the dis¬ 
closing look. The perceptual look. AAqdeia: the event in 
the landscape of the evening that conceals the morning. 
Oeav-opav and theory. 144 

d) The open at the beginning of the meditation on the word 
dAqdeta. Essential thinking: the leap into Being. Uncon¬ 
cealed beings in the security of the groundlessness of the 
open (the free) of Being. The concealment of the decision 
of the bestowal on man of unconcealedness in the secur¬ 
ing open. The entitlement, through the bestowal of Being, 
to see the open: a historical beginning. The alienation of 

man from the open. 148 

e) The open in the form of the unrestrained progression of 

beings. The open: the free of the clearing. The "open" 
of the "creature" in Rilke's eighth Duino Elegy. Reference 
to Schopenhauer and Nietzsche. The exclusion of the ani¬ 
mal from the strife between unconcealedness and conceal¬ 
edness. The excitability of what is alive. 151 

§9. Gea — ’AArjdeia. The looking of Being into the open lighted by 
it. The directive within the reference to the word of Parmenides: 
the thinker's journey to the home of aAqdeia and his thinking 
out toward the beginning. The saying of the beginning in the 
language of the Occident. 1 61 

ADDENDUM 165 
EDITOR'S AFTERWORD 169 



TRANSLATORS' FOREWORD 


This book is a translation of the text of Martin Heidegger's lecture course 
from the winter semester 1942-43 at the University of Freiburg. It was 
published posthumously as vol. 54 of his "Collected works" 
(Gesamtausgabe) in 1982. As the editor of the volume indicates, the 
course was actually entitled "Parmenides and Heraclitus," but in view 
of the preponderant treatment of Parmenides over Heraclitus in the 
lectures as delivered, the title was altered in publication. 

In accord with Heidegger's firm directive, his collected works are not 
appearing in a critical edition but as writings "aus letzter Hand." That 
is to say, the volumes in the series come "straight from his hand" and 
contain a minimum of scholarly apparatus such as variant readings, 
commentaries, emendations, etc "Ways, not works" ( Wege, nicht Werke) 
—that is the motto Heidegger placed at the head of his Gesamtausgabe. 
The difference is surely not that ways are meandering and tentative, 
works polished and final. The motto is thus not a kind of apology for 
a lack of rigor. Heidegger had in mind something else entirely; perhaps 
we could say that for him a work is the work of an author but a way 
is a way of thought. The motto thus expresses Heidegger's desire that 
attention be diverted away from himself as holding such and such an 
opinion, originating such and such a standpoint, having such and such 
a place within the history of philosophy, etc. All that sort ol historical- 
philological consideration was of minor importance to Heidegger. He 
wished to have certain ideas examined on their own merit, and he 
wished that others would engage themselves in the issues facing 
thought, but he had no desire to be the subject of learned debate as 
to what he "really" did or did not say. Naturally, Heidegger wanted 
his writings to be issued with due editorial care But it was his belief 
that the scholarly trappings of a critical edition, though well meant, 
could obscure a focus on the matter of thought and lead to "Heidegger 
scholarship" of a most sterile kind. Hence the Gesamtausgabe letzter Hand. 

The translations of the volumes in the collected works come under 
the same strictures. The reader will find here everything available to 
aid his or her understanding of the text that the reader of Heidegger's 
original German possesses, which amounts to little more than the bare 
text itself. In particular, neither the editor nor the translators feel com¬ 
pelled, or even justified, to prejudge for the reader what she or he will 
find within these pages. We shall limit ourselves here, then, to a few 

xiii 



xiv 


Translators' Foreword 


brief remarks concerning some technical aspects of the translation. 

Heidegger treats language with the utmost respect, and he exploits 
all the possibilities his native German offers, especially for plays on 
words. Yet this linguistic dexterity can be exasperating for the work 
of translation. Very seldom can a play on words in German be carried 
over into English without convoluted turns of phrase. In one or two 
places we felt justified in taking a certain liberty with English in order 
to capture something of Heidegger's use of language. Eor instance, 
Heidegger's word for "beginning" is Anfang. Etymologically, Anfang de¬ 
rives from an (in, at, to) and fangen (to seize, take, catch). This deriva¬ 
tion supports Heidegger's claim that the beginning of thinking is not 
something the primordial thinkers carry out from their own resources 
but something the beginning does to them; they do not themselves 
take up the beginning, but, quite to the contrary, they are seized and 
taken up by the beginning. Happily (though perhaps there are tho.se 
who will be disconcerted by our recourse to it) the English language 
has another word for "beginning"—with an etymology corresponding 
to that of Anfang That word is "inception," deriving from the Latin 
in (in, at, to) and capere (to seize, take, catch). We believe that our 
employment of "in-ception" (with a hyphen to emphasize the deriva¬ 
tion) in the appropriate context is at least a semi-successful example 
of preserving both the letter and spirit of Heidegger's language. The 
reader should be advised, however, that we are well aware of 
Heidegger's warning, in the very hook at hand, against just such a pro¬ 
cedure: e.g , in his proscription of translation as a mere copying of 
"word-forms." And in fact very rarely did we find it possible to translate 
by matching word-forms. Two examples might be illustrative in this 
regard the words Ubersetzung and Entbergung. 

Entbergung is a coinage on Heidegger's part It means, essentially, "dis¬ 
closure" and becomes Heidegger's preferred translation of the Greek 
d\i]daa (aletheia, "truth"). Eor Heidegger, as is well known, dXqdeia 
has a rich essence, and he attempts to capture something of that richness 
by emphasizing in turn the two components of the word Entbergung. 
Thus he maintains that truth is both an Entbergung and an En/bergung. 
A translation that slavishly followed the word-form would .say that truth 
is a ^//sclosure and a disclosure But this would fail to capture the change 
in sense that occurs when the accent is placed on the Bergung, for the 
word by itself means "salvage," "recovery," "shelter." Yet to declare 
simply that dArjdua signifies both disclosure and .shelter would surely 
seem to be combining two unrelated items. The translation of 
Entbergung then has to retain the ideas both of closure (to show the 
connection with "disclosure") and shelter (to indicate the sense of 
Bergung). Depending on the context, our translation of Ent-bergung has 
varied somewhat, but for the most part we have had recourse to the 



Translators' Foreword 


XV 


circumlocution "sheltering en-closure." 

Ubersetzung would ordinarily be rendered "translation." Again Hei¬ 
degger plays on the components of the word and distinguishes between 
ijheTsetzung and Oberseizung. And, once again, a translation that merely 
copied the form, translation versus trans/a/;en, would miss the point, 
even though the derivation of these English and German words is prac¬ 
tically the same: they both mean "to carry over." By emphasizing the 
prefix, in German the sense changes in a way that cannot be captured 
in English by following the same strategy. Eor Vhcrsetzung no longer 
refers to the linguistic act of translation but has a more basic concrete 
sense of literally "carrying over." We have thus rendered Vhersetzung 
as "transporting." Heidegger's claim that every act of translating is 
founded upon a transporting (of ourselves into a new realm of meaning) 
should then be understandable. 

Einally, the text, as one might expect in a book on ancient philosophy, 
is heavily flavored with Greek and Latin. It is giving away no secret 
that Heidegger decried the Latinizing of things Greek, and one of the 
central themes of the present volume is the impoverishment in the un¬ 
derstanding of Being concomitant with such "transporting." It seemed 
to us, therefore, that it would be altogether inappropriate, although 
perhaps making for easier reading, to Romanize the Greek script in 
a book so adamantly opposed to Latinization. To the reader unlamiliar 
with Greek, certain passages might appear rather formidable, then 
Nevertheless, almost every word Heidegger employs in a classical lan¬ 
guage is also translated by him, and in those few instances where that 
is not the case we have included a translation in a footnote, hoping 
our version does not violate Heidegger's own style of translation, deter¬ 
mined as it is by his highly individual and original interpretation of 
the ancients. 

Eor the rest, the book's format and content very closely match the 
source text. The German pagination is indicated in the running heads, 
and all footnotes are Heidegger's, or the editor's, except for those few 
translators' notes marked "Tr." 

A.S. 

R.R. 

Simon Silverman Phenomenology Center 

Duquesne University 



Introduction 


Preparatory Meditation on the Name 
and the Word AAHSEIA and Its 
Counter-Essence. Two Directives 
from the Translating Word 
AAHSEIA. 


§1. The goddess "truth." Parmenides, I, 22-32. 


a) Ordinary acquaintance and essential knowing. Renunciation of 
the prevalent interpretation of the "didactic poem" by heeding the 
claim of the beginning. 

riapiievidqq xai 'HpaxXeiToq, Parmenides and Heraclitus—these are 
the names of the two thinkers, contemporaries in the decades between 
540 and 460, who at the outset of Western thought uniquely belong 
together in thinking the true To think the true means to experience 
the true in its essence and, in such essential experience, to know the 
truth of what is true. 

Chronologically, 2,500 years have elapsed since the outset of Western 
thought. But the passing of the years and centuries has never affected 
what was thought in the thinking of these two thinkers. And this resis¬ 
tance to all-consuming time is by no means due to the simple conserva¬ 
tion of the thought these thinkers had to think—i.e , a conservation 
somewhere, at some supratemporal place, as the so-called "eternal," 
On the contrary, what is thought in this thinking is precisely the histori¬ 
cal, the genuinely historical, preceding and thereby anticipating all suc¬ 
cessive history. We call what thus precedes and determines all history 
the beginning. Because it does not reside back in a past but lies in 
advance of what is to come, the beginning again and again turns out 
to be precisely a gift to an epoch. 

In essential history the beginning comes last. Naturally, to a way of 
thinking acquainted only with the form of calculation, the proposition 
"The beginning is the last" is nonsense. To be sure, at first, at the outset, 
the beginning appears veiled in a peculiar way. Whence stems the re- 


1 



2 


Introduction 12 - 3 ] 


markable fact that the beginning is easily taken for the imperfect, the 
unfinished, the rough. It is also called the “primitive." And so the think¬ 
ers before Plato and Aristotle are said to be “primitive thinkers." Of 
course, not every thinker at the outset of Western thought is by that 
very fact also a thinker of the beginning, a primordial thinker. The first 
primordial thinker was named Anaximander. 

The two others, the only others besides Anaximander, were Parmeni¬ 
des and Heraclitus. An impression of arbitrariness is bound to arise 
from our distinguishing these three thinkers as the first primordial 
thinkers preceding all other thinkers of the Occident. And in fact we 
do not possess any easily available proof that could provide an immedi¬ 
ate foundation for our allegation. For that, we would need to acquire 
a genuine relation to the primordial thinkers. Such will be our goal 
in these lectures. 

In the course of the ages of Western history, later thinking is not 
only distant from its outset—i.e., chronologically distant—but also, and 
above all, it is removed from its beginning—i.e., distant with respect 
to what is thought. Subsequent generations become more and more 
alienated from the early thinking. Finally the distance becomes so great 
that doubt arises as to whether or not a later age is at all capable of 
rethinking the earliest thoughts. To this doubt another one attaches, 
questioning whether such a project, supposing it is in fact possible, 
would be of any use. What could we hope to accomplish, wandering 
astray amid the almost vanished traces of a long since past thought? 
And these doubts as to the possibility and usefulness of the undertaking 
receive still further reinforcement from the circumstance that this early 
thinking has been transmitted to us only in fragments. Here lies the 
explication of the fact that the views of scholars concerning the early 
“philosophy" of the Greeks vary widely and that the apprehension of 
these philosophical thoughts is utterly uncertain. 

The intention to reflect today on the thinking of Parmenides and 
Heraclitus is in this way surrounded by manifold doubts and objections. 
We shall allow these doubts and objections to stand and so spare our¬ 
selves the task of rebutting them in detail. Even if we wanted to engage 
in a confrontation with these objections, we would still have to accom¬ 
plish first of all what is unavoidable in any case, namely to think the 
thoughts both these thinkers have thought. And we could then not 
escape this one requirement that, before all else, we attend to the words 
of these thinkers. Perhaps if we pay sufficient attention and persevere 
in our thinking, we will discover the aforementioned doubts to be with¬ 
out foundation. 

The words of Parmenides have the linguistic form of verses and stro¬ 
phes. They seem to be a “poem." But because the words present a 
“philosophical doctrine," we speak of Parmenides' “doctrinal poem" 



§1 The goddess "truth" /3-5/ 


3 


or "didactic poem." Yet this charactenzation of his thoughtful utterances 
actually arises out of an impasse. We know poetry and poems, and 
we also know philosophical treatises. It is easy to see, however, that 
in the verses of Parmenides there is hardly anything "poetical," though 
on the contrary we find a great deal of what is generally called "the 
abstract." It therefore appeared that the best way to characterize the 
content of the thoughtful statements in question was to take into ac¬ 
count at once both moments, the form of the verse and the "abstract 
content," and so speak of a "doctrinal" or "didactic poem." 

Perhaps, however, we have here neither a "poem" of "poesy" nor 
a "doctrine." But how the words are said and how the said is thought, 
that can surely be made clear only if we first know what is thought 
here and what had to come to speech. Here in a unique way the word 
is spoken and a dictum is uttered. We will therefore henceforth call 
the primordial word of Anaximander, of Parmenides, and of Heraclitus 
the dictum of these thinkers. We mean by their "dictum" the whole 
of their utterances, not just single propositions and enunciations. In 
order to give tradition its due, however, we shall still speak at first 
of the "didactic poem" of Parmenides. 

(Since a separate edition of Parmenides' text has not been available 
for a long time, I had the text transcnbed and copied. The transcnption 
is arranged in such a way that the participants in the course, following 
the progress of the individual lectures, can insert the respective transla¬ 
tion on the facing page.) 

We will choose the most secure way to learn what is said and thought 
in the words of Parmenides. We will follow the text. The appended 
translation already contains an interpretation of the text. This interpre¬ 
tation, of course, needs clarification. But neither the translation nor 
the clarification carry much weight so long as what is thought in the 
word of Parmenides does not itself address us. Everything depends on 
our paying heed to the claim arising out of the thoughtful word. Only 
in this way, paying heed to the claim [Anspruch], do we come to know 
the dictum [Spruch\. What man heeds, what respect he gives to the 
heeded, how original and how constant he is in his heedfulness, that 
is what is decisive as regards the dignity allotted to man out of history. 

To think is to heed the essential . In such heedfulness essential know¬ 
ing resides. What we usually call "knowing" is being acquainted with 
something and its qualities. In virtue of these cognitions we "master" 
things. This mastering "knowledge" is given over to a being at hand, 
to its structure and its usefulness. Such "knowledge" seizes the being, 
"dominates" it, and thereby goes beyond it and constantly surpasses 
it. The character of essential knowing is entirely different. It concerns 
the being in its ground—it intends Being. Essential "knowing" does 
not lord it over what it knows but is solicitous toward it. For instance. 


4 


Introduction /5-6/ 


to take just one example, every “science" is a cognitive mastering, an 
outdoing, and a surpassing, if indeed not a complete bypassing, of a 
being. All of which occurs in the manner of objectivization. Versus this, 
essential knowing, heedfulness, is a retreat in face of Being. In such 
retreating we see and we perceive essentially more, namely something 
quite different from the product of the remarkable procedure of modern 
science. For the latter is always a technical attack on a being and an 
intervention for purposes of an "orientation" toward acting, “produc¬ 
ing," wheeling and dealing. Thoughtful heedfulness, in contrast, is at¬ 
tention to a claim that does not arise from the separate facts and events 
of reality and does not concern man in the superficiality of his everyday 
occupations. Only when this claim of Being, and not some objectivity 
or other out of the multiplicity of beings, addresses us in the word 
of Parmenides will the knowledge of his “propositions" have any justifi¬ 
cation. Without paying attention to this claim, whatever care we might 
contnve in the clarification of his thinking occurs in a void. 

The order of our clarification of the individual fragments is deter¬ 
mined by an interpretation of the leading thoughts. We base the separate 
clarifications on this interpretation, one which, of course, can only grad¬ 
ually come to light. The individual fragments are numbered in Roman 
numerals. We shall begin, it would seem arbitrarily, with the first frag¬ 
ment and specifically with verses 22-32. 


I, 22-32. 

22 And the goddess received me with sympathy; she took my right 
hand in her hand; then she spoke the word and addressed me 
in this way; “O man, companion of immortal charioteers, 

25 arnving at our home with the steeds that convey you. Blessing 
be bestowed on you! For it is not an evil fate which has sent you 
ahead to travel on this way—and truly this way is apart from men, 
outside their (trodden) path—but, rather, rule and order. There 
is, however, a need that you experience everything, both the stable 
heart of well-enclosing unconcealment, 

30 as well as the appeanng in its appearance to mortals, where there 
is no relying on the unconcealed. Also this, however, you will 
learn to experience; how the appearing 
32 (in the need) remains called upon to be apparent, while it shines 
through everything and (hence) in that way brings everything to 
perfection. 

The thinker Parmenides tells of a goddess who greets him as he ar- 
nves at her home in the course of his travels. To the greeting, whose 
proper essence the goddess herself clanfies, she adds an announcement 
of the revelations she has in store for the thinker as he goes his way. 
Hence everything the thinker says in the subsequent fragments of the 



§1 The goddess "truth" 16-81 


5 


"didactic poem" is the word of this goddess. If, at the very beginning, 
we pay heed to this and preserve it well and rigorously in our memory, 
from then on we shall take our direction from the insight, to be ac¬ 
knowledged gradually, that the dictum of the thinker speaks by bringing 
into language the word of this goddess. 

Who is the goddess^ We anticipate the answer conveyed only by 
the "didactic poem" as a whole. The goddess is the goddess "truth." 
"The truth"—it.self—is the goddess. Hence we shall avoid the locution 
that would speak of a goddess "of" the truth. For the expression "god¬ 
dess of truth" evokes the idea of a goddess to whose patronage and 
blessing "the truth" is only entrusted. In that ca.se, we would have 
two items on the one hand "a goddess" and on the other "the truth," 
standing under divine protection. We could then illu.strate this state 
of affairs in accordance with familiar examples. The Greeks worshiped, 
for instance, the goddess Artemis as the goddess of hunting and of ani¬ 
mals. Hunting and animals are not the goddess Artemis herself but are 
what is dedicated to her and what stands under her protection. If, how¬ 
ever, Parmenides calls the goddess "truth," then here truth itself is being 
^xjterienced as a goddess. This might seem strange to us. For in the 
first place we would consider it extremely odd for a thinker to relate 
his thinking to the word of a divine being. It is distinctive of the thinkers 
who later, i.e , from the time of Plato, are called "philosophers" that 
their own meditation is the source of their thoughts. Thinkers are indeed 
decidedly called "thinkers" because, as is said, they think "out of" them¬ 
selves and in their very thinking put themselves at stake. The thinker 
answers questions he himself has raised. Thinkers do not proclaim "rev¬ 
elations" from a god. They do not report the inspirations of a goddess. 
They state their own insights. What then are we to make of a goddess 
in this "didactic poem" which brings to words the thoughts of a thinking 
whose purity and rigor have never recurred since? But even if Parmeni¬ 
des' thinking did arise out of a ground as yet hidden to us and therefore 
rightfully stood in a relation to the godde.ss "truth," we would nonethe¬ 
less still be lacking the immediate appearance of a divine figure such 
as we are familiar with in the Greek world. Athena, Aphrodite, Artemis, 
and Demeter appear as unequivocally delineated "divine persons." The 
goddess "truth," on the other hand, is largely "abstract." One could 
even maintain that we have to do here with no "mythical experience" 
of this goddess but that a thinker out of his own initiative is "personify¬ 
ing" the universal concept "truth" in the indeterminate figure of a god¬ 
dess. In fact we very often come across this device of "hypostatizing" 
universal concepts as divinities, especially in later antiquity. 

Perhaps the thinker Parmenides is using a similar device in order 
to give more fullness and color to his otherwise all too "abstract" 
thoughts. In addition, if we consider that the start of Western thought 



6 


Introduction [8-91 


is accomplished with the Greeks, according to the prevalent view, by 
a dissociation of "logos" (reason) from "mythos," then it seems entirely 
understandable that in the first "primitive" attempts at such thinking 
there might still be preserved remnants of "mythical" representation. 
By means of such reflections, the presence of a goddess in a "philosophi¬ 
cally didactic poem" might be adequately explained. And from this ex¬ 
planation it follows that the reference to the goddess and she herself 
can now be dismissed as poetical and pseudo-mythical decorations, 
since indeed what matters is only to come to know the "philosophical 
system" of the thinker. 

That is the merest sketch of a widely-held position concerning the 
appearance of the goddess in the didactic poem of Parmenides. Al¬ 
though it is advocated in all sorts of treatises, it nevertheless remains 
a singular error. If this position onginated only in the presumption of 
successive generations to know everything better, or if it were merely 
the product of historiographical companson, calculating back and forth 
between the appearances of former and later times, then we could dis¬ 
pense with such explanations. The difficulty is that in them a mode 
of thought is speaking which, over two millennia, has solidified itself 
in the West and is in a certain respect even an aberrant consequence 
of the very thinking expressed in Parmenides' "didactic poem." We our¬ 
selves move within the long tradition of this mode of thinking, and 
we take it therefore as the "natural" one. 

Supposing, however, that the thinking of Parmenides and of Heracli¬ 
tus is essentially of an other kind, then what is required of us is a 
renunciation of the prevailing views, a renunciation that has nothing 
to do with the mere refutation of scholarly misinterpretations of the 
two thinkers. Actually, the renunciation touches us personally and af¬ 
fects us in an ever new manner and ever more decisively. Only superfi¬ 
cially does this renunciation seem to be a "negative" attitude. In truth 
it accomplishes the first step, whereby we pledge our heedfulness to 
the claim of the beginning, a beginning which, in spite of the historio- 
graphically represented temporal remoteness, is closer to us than what 
we are wont to consider the nearest. 


Recapitulation 


1) Outset and beginning. Ordinary thinking and the thinking 
begun by the beginning. Retreating in face of Being. The few and 
simple texts. Reference to "translating." 

We are attempting to follow the path of thought of two thinkers, Par¬ 
menides and Heraclitus. Both belong, historiographically calculated, to 



§1 The goddess “truth" I9-III 


1 


the early period of Western thought With regard to this early thinking 
in the Occident, among the Greeks, we are distinguishing between outset 
and beginning. Outset refers to the coming forth of this thinking at a 
definite "time." Thinking does not mean here the course of psychologi¬ 
cally represented acts of thought but the historical process in which 
a thinker arises, says his word, and so provides to truth a place within 
a historical humanity. As for time, it signifies here less the point of 
time calculated according to year and day than it means "age," the 
situation of human things and man's dwelling place therein. "Outset" 
has to do with the debut and the emergence of thinking. But we are 
using "beginning" in a quite different sense. The "beginning" is what, 
in this early thinking, is to be thought and what is thought. Here we 
are still leaving unclarified the essence of this thought. But supposing 
that the thinking of a thinker is distinct from the knowledge of the 
"sciences" and from every kind of practical cognition in all respects, 
then we have to say that the relation of thinking to its thought is essen¬ 
tially other than the relation of ordinary "technical-practical" and 
"moral-practical" thinking to what it thinks. 

Ordinary thinking, whether scientific or prescientific or unscientific, 
thinks beings, and does so in every case according to their individual 
regions, separate strata, and circumscribed aspects. This thinking is an 
acquaintance with beings, a knowledge that masters and dominates 
beings in various ways. In distinction from the mastering of beings, 
the thinking of thinkers is the thinking of Being. Their thinking is a re¬ 
treating in face of Being We name what is thought in the thinking of 
the thinkers the beginning. Which hence now means: Being is the be¬ 
ginning. Nevertheless, not every thinker, who has to think Being, thinks 
the beginning. Not every thinker, not even every one at the outset of 
Western thought, is a primordial thinker, i e , a thinker who expressly 
thinks the beginning. 

Anaximander, Parmenides, and Heraclitus arc the only primordial 
thinkers. They are this, however, not because they open up Western 
thought and initiate it. Already before them there were thinkers. They 
are primordial thinkers because they think the beginning The beginning 
is what is thought in their thinking. This sounds as if "the beginning" 
were something like an "object" the thinkers take up for themselves 
in order to think it through. But we have already said in general about 
the thinking of thinkers that it is a retreating in face of Being. If, within 
truly thoughtful thinking, the primordial thinking is the highest one, 
then there must occur here a retreating of a special kind. For these 
thinkers do not "take up" the beginning in the way a scientist "attacks" 
something. Neither do these thinkers come up with the beginning as 
a self-produced construction of thought. The beginning is not something 
dependent on the favor of these thinkers, where they are active in such 
and such a way, but, rather, the reverse: the beginning is that which 



8 


Introduction ///-/2/ 


begins something with these thinkers—by laying a claim on them in 
such a way that from them is demanded an extreme retreating in the 
face of Being. The thinkers are begun by the beginning, "in-cepted" 
[An-gefangenen] by the in-ception [An-fang]; they are taken up by it 
and are gathered into it. 

It is already a wrong-headed idea that leads us to speak of the “work" 
of these thinkers. But if for the moment, and for the lack of a better 
expression, we do talk that way, then we must note that their "work," 
even if it had been preserved for us intact, would be quite small in 
"bulk" compared with the "work" of Plato or Aristotle and especially 
in comparison with the "work" of a modern thinker. Plato and Aristotle 
and subsequent thinkers have thought far "more," have traversed more 
regions and strata of thinking, and have questioned out of a richer 
knowledge of things and man. And yet all these thinkers think "less" 
than the primordial thinkers. 

The problematic circumstance that a modern thinker needs a book 
of 400 or more pages in order to express something of what he has 
to say is an unerring sign that modern thinking stands outside the realm 
of the primordial thinking. In this connection we might recall Kant's 
Critique of Pure Reason and Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. Such signs 
make us realize that for a long time now the world has been out of 
joint and man is on the path of error. We must, however, also bear 
in mind that the book grounding modern philosophy, Descartes's Medi- 
tationes de prima philosophia comprises little more than a hundred pages 
and that decisive treatises of Leibniz require only a few sheets of letter¬ 
writing paper These facts, apparently only extrinsic, point out that in 
these treatises, very concentrated and simple as regards their internal 
construction, a transformation of thinking is enacted, one which, to 
be sure, does not arrive at the beginning but which once more ap¬ 
proaches its perimeter. Because we have been forced, for a long time 
now, to procure our knowledge by a process of selection from the excess 
of what is spoken and written, we have lost the capacity to hear the 
few simple things said in the words of the primordial thinkers. 

The difficulty in understanding, the reason it takes such pains to fol¬ 
low their path of thought, does not reside in the presumed difficulty 
of the "text" but resides only in the unwillingness and incapacity of 
our existence. With regard to the beginning there is no process of selec¬ 
tion. All we can do is cither set ourselves on the way toward the begin¬ 
ning or shun it. We shall attempt here to prepare for the first possibility. 

We concentrate all our endeavors, therefore, toward becoming atten¬ 
tive for once to the word of the primordial thinkers Wc begin with 
a reference to the word of Parmenides. It is handed down to us in 
fragments, some larger, some smaller. The whole into which the frag¬ 
ments fit is still clearly enough recognizable and expresses in verse form 



§1 The goddess “truth" ! 12-14! 


9 


the thoughts of a thinker. Hence it expresses a philosophical “doct¬ 
rine." Therefore we speak of the "doctrinal" or “didactic poem" of 
Parmenides. 

The fragments are counted in Roman numerals (Vlll, 45 means: 
eighth fragment, verse 45). We will present a translation of various 
fragments before clarifying them. This translation expresses in our lan¬ 
guage the Greek word. Our language is familiar to us. Nevertheless, 
knowing the translation does not at all guarantee an understanding 
of the words of the thinker. Therefore we stressed in the first lecture: 
“The appended translation already contains an interpretation of the 
text. This interpretation, of course, needs clarification." 

We must attend to this carefully: the translation does indeed contain 
the interpretation, but this interpretation does not come to light merely 
by hearing the translation Precisely because the translation speaks in 
the words of our language, the danger of misinterpretation is in fact 
heightened. For, now, versus the Greek words, the words of the transla¬ 
tion can easily be accepted according to the everyday meanings so famil¬ 
iar to us—without our having to pay attention to the fact that each 
translating word receives its content out of the thinker's whole thought. 
If, for example, the word "way" occurs in the translation, or the word 
“heart," that does not at all mean a decision has been made as to what 
“way" and “heart" mean there. Nor is it decided whether we are even 
capable of thinking the es.sence of “way" and the essence of "heart" 
as truly intended there or in Parmenides' sense at all Of course, it 
cannot be denied that everyone knows "in general" what "way" and 
“heart" mean. But only a translation thoroughly guided by an interpre¬ 
tation is, within certain limits, capable of speaking for itself. 

We are beginning with an elucidation of the first fragment of the 
so-called "didactic poem" and specifically with its concluding part, 
verses 22-32 The translation runs: 

22 And the goddess received me with sympathy; she took my right 
hand in her hand; then she spoke the word and addressed me 
in this way; “O man, companion of immortal charioteers, 

25 arriving at our hou.se with the steeds that convey you. Blessing 
be bestowed on you: For it is not an evil fate which has sent you 
ahead to travel on this way—and truly this way is apart from men, 
outside their (trodden) path—but, rather, rule and order. There 
is, however, a need that you experience everything, both the stable 
heart of well-enclosing unconcealment, 

30 as well as the appearing in its appearance to mortals, where there 
is no relying on the unconcealed Also this, however, you will 
learn to experience- how the appearing 
32 (in the need) remains called upon to be apparent, while it shines 



10 


Introduction //4-/5/ 


through everything and (hence) in that way brings everything to 
perfection. 

Parmenides is telling us about a goddess. The appearance of a "divine 
being" in the train of thought of a thinker strikes us as odd—because, 
on the one hand, in general a thinker is not supposed to proclaim the 
message of a divine revelation but is to assert on his own what he 
himself has questioned. And even when the thinker thinks about "the 
divine," as occurs in all "metaphysics," this thinking to dt'iov (the di¬ 
vine) is, as Aristotle said, a thinking from "reason" and not a reiteration 
of propositions from the "belief" of a cult or a church. The appearance 
of a goddess in the didactic poem of Parmenides is, however, particu¬ 
larly disconcerting because it is the goddess "truth." For "the truth," 
just like "beauty," "freedom," or "justice," counts for us as something 
"universal," something extracted from the singular and the actual, from 
what is at any particular moment true, just, or beautiful, and is therefore 
represented "abstractly," in a mere concept. To make of "the truth" 
a goddess amounts to turning the mere notion of something, namely 
the concept of the essence of truth, into a "personality." 


b) Two directives from the translating word aAqdeia. The 
conflictual character of unconcealedness. Preliminary clarification 
of the essence of aAqdeia and of concealedness. Transporting and 
translating [U bersetzen —tii^ersetzen]. 

If we hear in an initial and vague way of the goddess "truth" in the 
"didactic poem" and infer that here the "abstract notion" "truth" is 
being "personified" in a divine figure, then we are posing therewith 
as ones who believe they know both what "the truth" is as well as 
what is the essence properly belonging to the divinity of the Greek 
gods. 

But in fact we do not know anything about either. Even if we could 
suppose we were in.structed about the essence of truth as the Greeks 
thought it by taking the doctrines of Plato and Aristotle as a norm, 
we would already be on a false track that will never, on its own, lead 
back to what the early thinkers experienced when they gave a name 
to that which we signify by "truth." If we asked ourselves off the top 
of our heads what precisely we think when we use the word "truth," 
we would very quickly run into a tangled manifold of "views" or, per¬ 
haps, a general perjtlexity What of course is more important than 
counting the divergent interpretations of truth and of its essence is the 
insight, bound to arise on such an occasion, that we have up to now 
never seriously and carefully reflected on what exactly it is we call "the 



§1 The goddess "truth" /75-/6/ 


11 


truth." In the meantime, however, we always and constantly desire 
"the truth." Every age of history seeks "the true." 

But how seldom and how little does man understand the essence 
of the true, i.e., truth. Even if we people of today found ourselves in 
the happy condition of knowing the essence of truth, that would still 
not guarantee our being capable of thinking what in the early thought 
of the Greeks was experienced as the essence of truth. For not only 
the essence of truth, but also the essence of everything essential, has 
in every case its own wealth, from which an age in history may only 
draw a small amount as its own portion. 

If we say in anticipation and without proof that the goddess 'AAqdeia 
appears in the "didactic poem" of Parmenides not just for the sake 
of "poetic" embellishment but rather that the "essence" "truth" holds 
sway throughout the words of the thinker, then we need to clarify in 
advance the essence of ctAqdeia. 

The attempt to attain by means of thinking the proximity of the es¬ 
sence of ctAqdeia, in order to be solicited by it, shall require of us, 
who are still more distant from this essence than the Greeks themselves 
already were, vast detours and remote prospects. Such things, however, 
would be necessary even for us to be able to think only a little of the 
word of Anaximander, Heraclitus, or Parmenides in such a way that 
we are thinking out of that dimension in which there shows itself what 
for these thinkers is the to-be-thought and what remains for the future, 
although in a veiled way, the to-be-thought. And every endeavor to 
think d-Aqdeia in a somewhat suitable manner, even if only from afar, 
is an idle affair as long as we do not venture to think the Aqdq to 
which, presumably, dAqdeia refers back. 

What the Greeks name dAqdeia we ordinarily "translate" with the 
word "truth." If we translate the Greek word "literally," however, then 
it says "unconcealedness." It seems as if the "literal translation" con¬ 
sisted simply in patterning our word to correspond with the Greek 
word. While this is the beginning of literal translation, it is also in fact 
its end. The work of translation does not exhaust itself in such imitative 
building of "word-forms," which then often sound artificial and ugly. 
If we merely replace the Greek dAqdeia with our "unconcealedness," 
we are not yet actually translating. That occurs only when the translat¬ 
ing word "unconcealedness" transports us into the domain of experi¬ 
ence and the mode of experience out of which the Greeks or, in the 
case at hand, the primordial thinker Parmenides say the word dAqdeia. 
It is therefore an idle play with "word-forms" if we render dAqdeia 
by "unconcealedness," as has become fashionable recently, but at the 
same time attnbute to the word "unconcealedness," now meant to re¬ 
place the word "truth," a significance which we have merely gleaned 



12 


Introduction //7-/S/ 


from the ordinary later use of the word "truth" or which offers itself 
as the outcome of later thinking. 

What is named "unconcealedness" ["Unverborgenheit"], what we 
have to think in the name ’AAi]i%'ia in order for our thought to be 
fitting, is not yet experienced thereby, let alone secured in rigorous 
thinking. It could be that the specially formed word "dis-closure" ["Ent- 
bergung"] comes closer to the essence of the Greek d.\qdna than the 
expression "unconcealedness," which nevertheless, for several reasons, 
is at first appropriate to serve as the guiding word for a meditation 
on the essence of dXqdtia. It should be kept in mind that in the follow¬ 
ing we will be speaking of "unconcealedness" and "concealment" but 
that the obvious expression "unconcealment" ["Vnverbergung"] is 
avoided, although it is the "most literal" translation.' 

Every attempt at a "literal" translation of such foundational words 
as "truth," "Being," "semblance," etc. immediately arrives within the 
radius of an intention reaching essentially beyond the clever fabrication 
of literally matched words. We could appreciate this sooner and in a 
more serious way if we reflected on what it is to "translate." At first 
we conceive of this process in an external and technico-philological 
way. It is said that "translating" is the transposing of one language 
into another, of the foreign language into the mother tongue or vice 
versa. What we fail to recognize, however, is that we are also already 
constantly translating our own language, our native tongue, into its 
genuine word To speak and to say is in itself a translation, the essence 
of which can by no means be divided without remainder into those 
situations where the translating and translated words belong to different 
languages. In every dialogue and in every soliloquy an original translat¬ 
ing holds sway. We do not here have in mind primarily the operation 
of substituting one turn of phrase for another in the same language 
or the use of "paraphrase." Such a change in the choice of words is 
a consequence deriving from the fact that what is to be said has already 
been transported for us into another truth and clarity—or perhaps ob¬ 
scurity. This transporting can occur without a change in the linguistic 
expression. The poetry of a poet or the treatise of a thinker stands within 
its own proper unique word. It compels us to perceive this word again 
and again as if we were hearing it for the first time. These newborn 
words transpose us in every case to a new shore. So-called translation 
and paraphrase are always subsequent and follow upon the transporting 
of our whole being into the realm of a transformed truth. Only if we 
are already appropriated by this transporting are we in the care of the 
word. Only on the basis of a respect for language grounded in this 


1 Sec pp 1 }2ff 




§1 The goddess “truth" II8-I9I 


13 


way can we assume the generally lighter and more limited task of trans¬ 
lating a foreign word into our own language. 

But the more difficult task is always the translation of one's own 
language into its ownmost word. That is why, e.g., the translation of 
the word of a German thinker into the German language is especially 
difficult—because there reigns here the tenacious prejudice to the effect 
that we who speak German would understand the German word with¬ 
out further ado, since it belongs, after all, to our own language, 
whereas, on the contrary, to translate a Greek word we must in the 
first place learn that foreign tongue We cannot discuss here in a more 
penetrating way to what extent and why every discourse and every 
saying is an original translation within one's own language and pre¬ 
cisely what “to translate" means here. In the course of our introductory 
lectures on dXqdtia there will perhaps at times be an opportunity to 
experience something of these matters. 

In order for us to be in a position to transport ourselves into the 
realm of the Greek word dXqdtia and so be able to speak this word 
henceforth in a thoughtful way, we must first become alert to and follow 
the directive provided by the translating word "unconcealedness." The 
directive shows as it were the direction of the transporting The directive 
leads, if we limit ourselves to its main features, into a fourfold. 

On the one hand, the word "un-concealedness" directs us to some¬ 
thing like "concealedness." What, as regards "un-concealedness," is 
previously concealed, who does the concealing and how it takes place, 
when and where and for whom concealment exists, all that remains 
undetermined. Not only now and for us who are trying to reflect on 
dAqdfia under the guidance of its translation as “unconcealedness," 
but also and precisely among the Greeks, that which is intimated about 
concealedness remains undetermined and even unquestioned. The 
Greeks experience genuinely and express in word only unconcealed¬ 
ness. Nevertheless, the directive toward concealedness and concealing 
provides us now with a clearer realm of experience. In some way or 
other we surely do know the likes of concealing and concealedness. 
We know it as veiling, as masking, and as covenng, but also in the 
forms of conserving, preserving, holding back, entrusting, and appropri¬ 
ating. We also know concealedness in the multiple forms of closing 
off and closedness. From these modes of concealedness and concealing, 
"unconcealedness" immediately gains clearer features. The realm of the 
"concealed-unconcealed" is, if we do not deceive ourselves, more im¬ 
mediately familiar and accessible than what is expressed in the banal 
titles veritas and "truth." Strictly speaking, the word "truth" does not 
give us anything to think and still less anything to represent "intui¬ 
tively." We must immediately call for help from a borrowed "definition" 



14 


Introduction 119-21 f 


of truth in order to give significance to the word. A special consideration 
is first needed if we are to introduce ourselves into the realm of meaning 
of the word "truth." "Unconcealedness," though, is different in appeal¬ 
ing to us immediately, even if also here we first probe uncertainly for 
what is properly meant. 

Second, the word "unconcealedness" indicates that something like 
a suspension or cancellation of concealedness belongs to the Greek ex¬ 
perience of the essence of truth. The prefix "un-" corresponds to the 
Greek d-, which grammar calls "a privativum." What kind of privatio, 
deprivation, and taking away is at stake in a privative word-formation 
depends in each case on what it is that is exposed to the deprivation 
and impairment. "Un-concealedness" can mean concealedness is taken 
away, cancelled, evicted, or banned, where taking away, cancelling, 
evicting, and banning are essentially distinct. "Un-concealedness" can 
also mean concealedness is not allowed at all, that, although possible 
and a constant menace, it does not exist and may not arise. From this 
multiplicity of meanings of the prefix "un" it is easy to see that already 
in this respect un-concealedness is difficult to determine. And yet it 
is precisely here that a basic feature of the essence of un-concealedness 
comes to the fore, which we must expressly hold in view in order to 
experience the primordial Greek essence of "truth." This opposition re¬ 
sides in un-concealedness itself In the essence of truth as un-concealed¬ 
ness there holds sway some sort of conflict with concealedness and 
concealment. 


Recapitulation 


2) The question of the name of the goddess and how to translate 
it. The essence of truth as opposed to concealedness, according to 
the first two directives. Un-concealedness and t/n-concealedness. 

The first passage we are clarifying belongs to Fragment 1 and begins 
with verse 22: xai pc ded np6(po)v vneSe^aio, . . . "And the goddess 
received me with sympathy ..." 

The goddess appearing here is the goddess ’AAqdeia. We ordinanly 
translate: the goddess "truth." This goddess greets the thinker upon 
his arrival at her home and reveals to him what he has to experience 
henceforth; it will be for this thinker the to-be-thought and will remain 
from now on in the history of truth what is primordially to be thought. 
We can easily discern, if only in broad outlines, that the essence of 
this goddess "truth" decides everything about the thinker and the to-be¬ 
thought. Therefore, prior to the formal clarification of the individual 



§1 The goddess "truth" 121-221 


15 


fragments and verses, we must attempt to illuminate the essence of 
"truth." With this purpose we ask: What does the name of the goddess 
mean? That is, what is the meaning of the Greek word dAi'jdaa, which 
we translate as "truth"? Here we are "dealing," apparently, with a word. 
Because word and language have become for us a conveyance and a 
tool for communication, one among others, to speak of "dealing with 
words" produces at once a fatal impression. It is as if, instead of mount¬ 
ing a motorcycle, we would remain standing before it and make a 
speech about it with the intention of learning in this way how to ride 
it. But a word is not a tool, even to one who maintains language is 
only a conveyance or a means of communication, such that it would 
be a matter of indifference whether we say "University" ["Universitat''] 
and thereby still think of something or whether we ramble on about 
the "U" ["Uni”]- Perhaps one studies today only at a "U." 

To be sure, neither are we "dealing" here with mere "word-forms" 
["Worter"]- In science, of course, one can deal with word-forms as one 
would treat the history of the evolution of earthworms. ’A-\i]dna 
means, "literally" [“wortlich"] translated, "un-concealedness." By at¬ 
tending to the "literal," we seem to take the word seriously. Neverthe¬ 
less we are disrespecting words [Worte] so long as we only take an 
interest in the form of the words. The "literal" translation must not 
simply copy the form and thereby "enrich" the translating language 
with "new," unusual, and often unwieldy locutions, but it must go 
beyond the form and reach the words themselves. Erudition about 
the form does not guarantee a knowledge of the words. These latter 
say what is properly to be said: the dictum. Of course, if we listen 
to the literal in such a way that before all else, and therefore constantly, 
we heed the word and think out of the word, then the high repute 
of the "literal" is justified—but only then. 

We must hear the literally taken word in such a way that we heed 
its directives in their pointing to the dictum. In such heeding we then 
hearken to what the word is trying to say We exercise attentiveness. 
We begin to think. 

Let us now attempt to pursue the directives provided by the literal 
translating word "unconcealedness," so that we might thereby hear the 
Greek word d\i]dt'ia more clearly and thus surmise something of the 
essence of "truth" as experienced by the Greeks. The word "uncon¬ 
cealedness" provides a fourfold directive. 

The first two directives can be indicated and fixed by cfianging the 
emphasis in the word "unconcealedness"" un-concealedness and un- 
concealedness. \Jn-concealedness points immediately to "concealedness " 
Where there is concealedness, a concealing must occur or must have 
occurred. Concealing can exist in many modes: as covering and mask¬ 
ing, as conserving and putting aside, as closing off and original preserv- 



16 


Introduction 122-231 


ing—^just as with a source that wells up only as long as it is already 
preserving But what it is the Greeks experience and think when they 
allude to a “concealedness" in every “unconccaledness” is not immedi¬ 
ately evident. It can be grasped only by a special consideration. And 
that in turn requires a prior knowledge of the modes of concealing 
in general. Only thus can “concealedness,” as the Greeks thought of 
it, and its circumscribed essential realm be distinguished adequately. 
But before we reach that far, the Greek word aXqdeia has already ob¬ 
tained a certain proximity by means of its translation as "unconcealed- 
ness”; for the experiential domain of "concealing” and “not conceal¬ 
ing," “concealed" and “unconcealed," is at once more clear and more 
familiar than any meaning we would attribute to our ordinary word 
"truth" by means of an adventitious reflection. The “meaning" and 
"definition" of "truth" gained in that way would have to be expressly 
noted by us each time. And we would be at risk of fastening upon 
only one of the many random definitions possible from various philo¬ 
sophical standpoints. Now concealment, on the contrary, is something 
we are acquainted with—because the things themselves and their con¬ 
nections hide themselves from us and for us, or because we ourselves 
bring about concealments, perform and allow them, or because both 
a concealing of "things" and a concealing of this concealing occur in 
an interplay through us. 

The translating word wn-concealedness directs us, secondly, to the 
striking fact that the Greeks think in the essence of truth something 
like the taking away, cancellation, or annihilation of concealment. Cor¬ 
responding to this negation of concealment, truth for the Greeks is, 
as it were, something "negative." Thereby an odd state of affairs comes 
to light, to which our ordinary ncgation-lcss word "truth" (as well as 
veritas and verite) bars every way. What the prefixes "d-" and "un-" 
in the words a-Xqdeia and "un-concealcdncss" properly mean is at 
first as little decided and founded as is the meaning of the "concealed¬ 
ness" that is removed and "negated." What we can see clearly here 
is only this: the essence of truth as unconcealedness stands in some 
sort of opposition to concealment. Indeed it appears unconcealedne.ss 
is involved with concealedness in a "conflict," the essence of which 
itself remains in dispute. 



Part One 


The Third Directive from the 
li'anslating Word AAHSEIA: The 
Realm of the Opposition between 
AAHSEIA and AHSH in the History 

of Being. 


§2. First meditation on the transformation of the essence of truth 
and of its counter-essence. 


a) The conflictual character of un-concealedness. The third 
directive: truth in oppositional relations. The resonance of dXqdeia 
in subjectivity. Reference to Hegel and Schelling. Directive toward 
the oppositions between concealedness and unconcealedness, 
falsity and truth. 

"Thath" is never "in itself," available by itself, but instead must be gained 
by struggle. Unconcealedness is wrested from concealment, in a conflict 
with it. Unconcealedness is not simply gained through conflict in the 
general sense that among humans truth is something to be sought out 
and to be struggled for. Rather, the sought and struggled for, regardless 
of the conflict in man over it, is in its very essence a conflict: "uncon¬ 
cealedness." It is unclear who is struggling here and how those involved 
are struggling It is important, however, to think for once this conflictual 
essence of truth, an essence which has been shining for 2,500 years 
in the faintest of all lights. The task is to experience properly the conflict 
occurring within the essence of truth. 

To be sure, the essence of the conflict is at first itself controversial. 
Presumably, "conflict" here means something other than mere quarrel 
and fight, other than blind discord, other than "war," and other than 
"competition" as well. Perhaps these are only variations and initial ap¬ 
pellations of the conflict, the primordial essence of which we may sur¬ 
mise in the essence of truth in the sense of ctAqdeia and which we 
will come to know one day. Perhaps the word of Heraclitus, so often 
misused and always truncated, II6Atfio<; ndviov . . . naiqp ecni, as 


17 



18 


The Third Directive 126 - 27 ] 


rendered “War is the father of all things . . . has in common with 
Greek thinking only the empty verbal sound. 

But how are we to know anything definite of the essence of itoArpoc; 
(which, according to the dictionary, does indeed literally mean “war"), 
and how are we even to surmise the essence of the "polemical" named 
here, as long as we know nothing of a conflict indigenous to the very 
essence of truth? And how could we know the primordial conflictual 
character of the conflict in the essence of truth as long as we did not 
experience its essence as unconcealedness and knew dAqdtio at most 
as a word-sound buzzing in the air? The conflictual essence of truth 
has already been alien to us and to Western thought for a long time. 
For us, “truth" means the opposite: that which is beyond all conflict 
and therefore must be nonconflictual. 

Accordingly, we do not understand to what extent the essence of 
truth itself is, in itself, a conflict. If, however, in the primordial thinking 
of the Greeks the conflictual essence of truth was experienced, then 
it cannot astonish us to hear, in the dicta of this primordial thinking, 
precisely the word "conflict." The interpretation of the Greek world 
by Jacob Burckhardt and Nietzsche has taught us to recognize the "ago¬ 
nal principle" and to see in the "competitive match" an essential "im¬ 
pulse" in the "life" of this people. But we must then go on to ask 
where the principle of the "agon" is grounded and whence the essence 
of "life" and of man receives its determination so that it is "agonal." 
"Competitiveness" can only arise where the conflictual is experienced 
before all else as what is essential. But to maintain that the agonal 
essence of Greek humanity rests on a corresponding predisposition of 
the people would be an "explanation" no less thoughtless than .saying 
the essence of thinking is grounded on the capacity to think. 

We have noted so far that, on the one hand, unconcealedness belongs 
to the realm where concealment and concealing occur. On the other 
hand, wn-concealedness makes manifest a conflictual essence; i.e., it 
is unconcealing when in it something comes to pass that is in conflict 
with concealment. 

"Unconcealedness" provides a third directive, according to which 
truth, on the basis of its conflictual essence, stands within "opposi¬ 
tional" relations ' For the usual theory of truth, the opposite to truth 
is merely "untruth" in the sense of falsity Something is either true 
or false. To be sure, in the age of the first completion of Western meta¬ 
physics, in the philosophy of Schelling and Hegel, thinking reaches the 
insight that .something can at the same time, though in different re¬ 
spects, be true as well as false. Also, in the form of "negativity," some¬ 
thing discordant appears here within the essence of truth. But to infer 


1 See bckiw, pp 117-119 




§2 Transformation of the essence of truth (27-291 19 

that what we have said about the conflictual essence of truth coincides 
with the doctrines of Schelling and Hegel, or could be understood in 
hindsight with the help of their metaphysics, would be even more disas¬ 
trous than the sheer ignorance of these relationships. For the main fea¬ 
ture of the essence of truth in the modern metaphysics of Schelling 
and Hegel is never dAqdeia in the sense of unconcealedness but is cer¬ 
tainty in the sense of certitudo, which, since Descartes, stamps the es¬ 
sence of veritas. Anything resembling the self-certitude of the self- 
conscious subject is alien to the Greeks. But, conversely, a resonance 
of the Greek essence of ctAqdeia still pervades the essence of the modern 
"subjectivity of the spirit," which, correctly understood, has nothing 
to do with "subjectivism." But the beginning appeals only to what is 
of the beginning, and no resonance rivals the original sounding. The 
two do not coincide. Nevertheless both are the same, even when they 
appear to diverge to the point of being irreconcilable. This holds in 
what follows for the fourth directive, which may be able to provide 
to an attentive thinking the Greek understanding of ctAqdeia. 

This recollection of the history of the essence of truth in Western 
thought, necessary here, though to be sure very elementary, suggests 
concomitantly that we would be prey to coarse falsifications if we inter¬ 
preted the thinking of Parmenides and Heraclitus with the help of mod¬ 
ern "dialectics," claiming that in the primordial thinking of the Greeks 
the "oppositional" and even the basic opposition of Being and Nothing 
"plays a role." Instead of the facile, and apparently philosophical, proce¬ 
dure of borrowing from Schelling and Hegel for help in interpreting 
Greek philosophy, we have to exercise attentiveness and follow the di¬ 
rectives truth in the essential form of unconcealedness can afford us. 
Of course, as an immediate reaction to this, we are tempted to remark 
that we today can grasp the primordial thinking of the Greeks only 
by interpreting it on the basis of our own representations. Thereby the 
question arises as to whether the thinking of Schelling and Hegel, their 
whole work, does not possess an incomparably higher rank than the 
thinking of today. Would it occur to any person of insight to deny that? 
We must also concede that the beginning will show itself, if it shows 
itself at all, only with our contribution. But the question remains as 
to what sort of contribution this is; whence, and how, is it to be deter¬ 
mined? Similarly, it might very well seem that our endeavor to think, 
the beginning is but an attempt, out of our present and for it, to come 
to grips with the past historiographically. It would be equally useless, 
and in fact an aberration, if we were trying to draw up an account 
about something requiring a more essential effort and preparation, 
namely the foundation and development of a metaphysical basic thesis 
in the course of the tradition of Western thinking instead of simply 
attempting to heed the beginning. Yet who could deny that in this at- 



20 


The Third Directive 129 - 30 ] 


tempt we are constantly exposed to the danger of pressing forward, 
along with our contemporaries, in an undue fashion? Nevertheless, we 
shall attempt to heed the directives furnished by the essence of uncon¬ 
cealedness, an essence hardly ever thought and always difhcult to think. 

Unconcealedness suggests an "opposition" to concealedness. The or¬ 
dinary opposition to truth is untruth in the sense of falsity. We find 
this opposition already very early in the thinking and speaking of the 
West and also in its poetry. After what we have remarked up to now 
about truth as unconcealedness, we obviously have to be wary of inter¬ 
preting later notions of the false and falsity into earlier "representa¬ 
tions." On the other hand, we can adequately think the early meanings 
of "the false" as opposed to the true only if we have previously reflected 
on the true in its truth, i.e., on unconcealedness. But, by the same 
token, unconcealedness (dXqdaa) itself can be grasped adequately only 
from its counter-essence, the untruth, and therefore from falsity, i.e., 
within that domain of essential experience opened up along with dXq- 
dcia. From this it is clear that we can never think "the true" and "the 
false," "truth" and "falsity," as separate from each other in essence, 
and even less could we think truth as "unconcealedness" in such a 
way, for here the oppositional relation to concealment is manifest im¬ 
mediately in the very name. Therefore, if falsity, in the early way of 
thinking, already appears as one of the opposites to truth, i e , to uncon¬ 
cealedness, then this essence of falsity as opposed to unconcealedness 
must be a type of concealedness. If unconcealedness gives the essence 
of truth its character, then we must attempt to understand falsity as 
a concealment. 


b) The question of the counter-essence of dAqdeq. The absence of 
Aqdeq; the ipevSoq. The veiling of basic meanings. The counter¬ 
word Aadov, Aavddvoiiai thought in the Greek way. Forgetting as 
experienced on the basis of concealment. Homer, Iliad, XVlll, 46; 

X, 22; Odyssey, Vlll, 93. 

Pursuing this directive, we will begin by asking what is the word for 
the counter-essence to dAqdeia. I'd dAqdtq is translated as "the true." 
This means "the unconcealed," in accordance with our interpretation 
of dAqdtia as unconcealedness. As long as it remains unclear, however, 
in what sense "unconcealedness" is to be thought, the translation ol 
dAqddq by "unconcealed" also stands under an essential reservation 
The opposite of the "unconcealed," the concealed, can easily be found, 
in name at least, if we simply revoke the a-privativum, annul the can¬ 
cellation of the concealed, and let it, "the concealed," remain. Termino- 
logically, the crossing out of the a leads to Aqddq. But nowhere do 
we actually find this word as the name for the false. Instead, the Greeks 



§2 Transformation of the essence of truth 130-32] 21 

call the false to ipevSoq. This word has another stem entirely and an¬ 
other root and accordingly another basic meaning, not directly ascer¬ 
tainable. In the root "Aad" resides "concealing." That is not what ipev- 
6oq means, at least not immediately. We are tempted to point out that 
also in our language the counter-word to "truth," namely, "falsity," 
is an entirely different word. But perhaps the Greek counterwords 
aAqdeia—tpevSoq are closer to each other than our corresponding 
words "truth" and "falsity." It could be that tpevSoq can be thought 
appropriately only in reference to aAqdeia, but it could just as well 
be, precisely because if/ev6oq is the ordinary counter-word to aAqdeia, 
that it will suggest how aAqdeia itself is to be experienced. 

In the attempt to trace the basic meanings of words and word-forms 
we are often guided, of course, by inadequate ideas of language in gen¬ 
eral, which then contribute to the current misjudgments about the very 
inquiry into basic meanings. We are wrong to think that the word-forms 
of a language originally possessed the pure basic meaning, which then 
got lost with the passage of time and became distorted. The basic and 
root meaning, on this view, remains quite hidden and only appears 
in the so-called "derivations." But this theory already leads us astray, 
for it presupposes that there would exist somewhere the "pure basic 
meaning" in itself, from which then other meanings would be "de¬ 
rived." These erroneous ideas, reigning supreme in linguistics even 
today, originate in the circumstance that the first reflection on language, 
Greek grammatics, was developed under the guiding lines of "logic," 
i.e., the theory of declarative assertions, propositional theory. Accord¬ 
ingly, propositions are composed out of words, and the latter denote 
"concepts." These indicate what is represented "in general" in the word. 
This "general" of the concept is then considered to be the "basic mean¬ 
ing." And the "derivations" are particularizations of the general. 

Even though our thoughtful inquiry is aiming here at a basic mean¬ 
ing, we are nevertheless guided by an entirely different conception of 
the word and of language. To claim we are involved in a so-called 
"word-philosophy," which sorts out everything from mere verbal 
meanings, is admittedly very convenient, but it is also such a superficial 
view it does not even deserve to be labeled false. What we are calling 
the basic meaning of words is their beginning, which does not appear 
at first, but at last, and even then never as a detached formation, a 
specimen we could represent as something for itself The so-called basic 
meaning holds sway in a veiled manner in all the modes of saying 
the respective word. 

The counter-word to "unconcealing" (true), aAqdeq, has quite an 
unrelated sound: qjevdoq. We translate to ipevSoc; as "the false," with¬ 
out exactly knowing what "false" means here and how it is to be 
thought—above all in the Greek sense. In any case it would now finally 



22 


The Third Directive 132 - 33 ] 


appear to be the time to consider once and for all that the counter-word 
to aAqdeq is not what seems to lie closest, Aqdec; or Aadec; or some 
similar-sounding word, but ipevdoc;. This remark, however, does not 
completely reveal the enigmatic character of the opposition in question. 
The word ipevSoc; as the word for the "false” is in fact connected to 
something we do not find with respect to the word aAqdet;, namely 
a privative meaning formed on the same stem: to atpevSeq —the un- 
false. But that is exactly what is "without falsity" and hence is the 
true. At the outset of book (18) of the Iliad, Homer tells us of the 
lament of Achilles and his mother Thetis over his fallen fnend Patroclos. 
The Nereides, the goddesses of waterways, grieve with Thetis; among 
these goddesses is mentioned in Z 46 /) ’Aif/£v6qq —the goddess "with¬ 
out falsity." Now we have only to write this name i) ’AipevSnc; under 
the name q AAqdeia in order to receive an important clue. If for the 
Greeks the counter-essence to unconcealedness is falsity and accord¬ 
ingly truth is unfalsity, then concealedness must be determined on the 
basis of falsity. If, in addition to this, concealedness permeates the es¬ 
sence of unconcealedness, then the enigma arises that in the Greek 
sense the essence of truth receives its character from the essence of 
falsity. This, however, might very well appear to be a singular mistake 
if we consider that the "positive" never springs forth from the negative, 
but, at most, conversely, the latter might stem from the former. Yet 
we know in the meantime that the Greek name for the essence of truth 
expresses precisely this enigma, according to which concealedness and 
the conflict with it are decisive for that essence. And it is precisely there¬ 
fore that we could surely expect that in the counter-word to uncon¬ 
cealedness, concealedness would be named with an appropriate clarity. 
But instead of that we hear of iptv&x; The counter-words to aAqdeia 
arising from the stem Aad seem to be missing. 

But this is only seemingly so, above all because we translate a familiar 
Greek word of the stem /lad, to which aAqdeia belongs, namely Aavda- 
vopai, in such a way that the essential is obliterated. According to the 
dictionary, Aavdavopai means "to forget." Everyone understands what 
that means. Everyone experiences "forgetting" daily. But what is it? 
What do the Greeks think when they signify by the word AavdavEodai 
what we call "to forget"? 

First of all we need a clarification of Aavdaveiv. Aavdavcj means 
"1 am concealed." The aorist participle of this verb is Aaduv, /Iadov. 
Here we find the counter-word to aAqdif; we have been looking for. 
Aadov is the being that is concealed; Addpa means "in a concealed 
way," "secretly." /Iadov means what is concealed, what keeps itself 
concealed. Nevertheless /Iadov, the being that is concealed, is not the 
counter-word to aAqdeq, the "unconcealed"—that is, insofar as the 



§2 Transformation of the essence of truth 133-35] 23 

counter-word to the unconcealed means falsity. For the concealed is 
not ipso facto the false. But presumably, on the other hand, to ipevSoq, 
the false, always remains in essence a kind of concealedness and con¬ 
cealing. Perhaps we must indeed understand to ipevSot; under the guid¬ 
ance of "concealing" and "being concealed," and especially if the words 
of the stem "concealing" and "concealed" have within Greek thought 
and speech a dominating semantic power. And in fact they do. It is 
just that in the Latin and in all Romance languages, as well as in our 
own Germanic style of speaking and thinking, it is utterly obliterated. 
Before we can clanfy the essence of ipevdoq as it is thought by the 
Greeks, we have to acknowledge that and to what extent Aavdaveiv, 
"being concealed," is for the Greeks an essential feature of all appear¬ 
ance of beings. Aavddvo means "I am hidden." Homer (Odyssey, & 
[8]) has the singer Demodokos, after the festive meal in the palace 
of the king of the Phaeacians, tell of the hard lot that befell the Greeks 
before TLoy. Because of his sorrow in remembenng these times, Odys¬ 
seus covers his head with his mantle 0, 93: 

evd' aWovq p.i:v naviaq £\avdav£ baxpva An'ficjv, 

'AAxi'voo(, di piv oicx; £ii£<ppaoa-i ’ h’6qo£v 

i]p.£vo(; ayx' amov, 

"But then he (Odysseus) shed tears, without the others noticing it, 

Alkinoos alone was aware of his sorrow . 

The German translation of Voss apparently comes closer to the Greek 
word because in a certain way it integrates the word eAdvdave from 
verse 93: 

"To all other guests he concealed his flowing tears " 

But eAdvdave does not mean transitively "he concealed"; Aavddvcj 
does not mean "I conceal," but rather "I am concealed." 'EAdvdave, 
said of Odysseus, means "He (Odysseus) was concealed." "Literally," 
and thought in the Greek way, Homer says: "but then in relation to 
all others he was concealed as the one shedding tears.' It is, according 
to our way of speaking and thinking, linguistically more correct to 
translate, "Odysseus, unnoticed by the others, shed tears." Greek think¬ 
ing is reversed, indeed to such an extent that "concealing" in the sense 
of "being concealed" is precisely the ruling word. The Greeks say: Odys¬ 
seus was concealed to the others as the one shedding tears. 

In another place, from the Iliad X (22), verse 277, we find a similar 
incident. In the duel with Hector, Achilles missed with his first lance 
because Hector ducked out of the way. The lance stuck in the ground: 



24 


The Third Directive 135 - 36 ] 


dvd S' rj[>naaf flaWdi; 'Adqvq, 
difj S' 'A;(iAqi Si'Sov, AddF S'"Exiopa, nniptva Aadiv 

Voss translates: 

"the goddess seized it (the lance) and immediately gave it back to the 
Peleidian, unnoticed by the warlike Hector." 

This is "well" thought and said in our German language; unnoticed 
by Hector, Athena gave Achilles back his lance. Thought, however, in 
the Greek way, it means: Athena was concealed to Hector in her giving 
back of the lance. We see once more how "concealedness" makes up 
the basic feature of the behavior of the goddess, which basic feature 
of concealment first bestows on her particular action the character of 
its "Being." But perhaps the exact reversal of our way of experiencing, 
thinking, and speaking in relation to the Greek way appears most clear- 
cut in the example of the well-known Epicurean proverb; Adds ^moaq. 
We translate in "correct" German; "Live unnoticed." But the Greeks 
say: "Be concealed in the way you conduct your life." Here concealment 
determines the character of the presence of man among men. The "con¬ 
cealed" and the "unconcealed" are characters of the very being itself 
and not characteristics of the noticing or apprehending. Nevertheless, 
perceiving and saying have indeed for the Greeks, too, the basic feature 
of "truth" or "untruth." 

It may be clear from these few remarks how decisively the domain 
and the occurrence of concealing and concealedness hold sway, for the 
Greeks, over beings and over human comportment toward beings. If 
now, after this comment and in its light, we once more consider the 
most common Greek word of the stem /fad, namely Aavddvopai, then 
it is plain that the usual and indeed "correct" translation by our German 
word "to forget" renders nothing at all of the Greek way of thinking. 
Thought in the Greek fashion, Aavdavopai says; I am concealed from 
myself in relation to something which would otherwise be unconcealed 
to me. This is thereby, for its part, concealed, just as I am in my relation 
to it. The being sinks away into concealment in such a manner that 
with this concealment of the being I remain concealed from myself 
Moreover, this concealment is itself concealed. Something similar does 
indeed occur when we forget this or that. In forgetting not only does 
something slip from us, but the forgetting slips into a concealment of 
such a kind that we ourselves fall into concealedness precisely in our 
relation to the forgotten. Therefore the Greeks say more precisely ini- 
Aavdavopai, in order to capture the concealedness in which man is 
involved, especially with respect to the concealment's relation to what 
is withheld from man because of it. A more uncanny way to think 



§2 Transformation of the essence of truth [36-38] 


25 


the essence of forgetting in one single word can hardly be imagined. 

The way Greek speech in general uses Aavdaveiv (being concealed) 
as a “ruling" word, as well as the interpretation of the essence of forget¬ 
ting precisely through this event of concealing, already show clearly 
enough that in the "existence" of the Greeks, i,e„ in their dwelling 
in the midst of beings as such, the essence of concealment holds sway 
essentially. From this we can already surmise more readily why they 
experience and think truth in the sense of "unconcealedness." But in 
view of this dominating event of concealment, should not the essence 
of the most common opposite to truth, i,e„ the essence of falsity, i.e., 
TO ipevSoc;, also be determined on the basis of concealing, even though 
in the sound of the word ipevSot; the stem Aad- cannot be heard? 

We become assured in this surmise when we consider that the false 
and untrue, e.g,, an incorrect judgment, is a kind of not knowing, in 
which the "true" state of affairs is withheld from us, not in exactly 
the same way as "forgetting," which the Greeks do experience on the 
basis of concealment, though indeed in a corresponding way. Now 
whether Greek thinking also conceives the essence of ipevSoq on the 
basis of concealment can only be shown by paying heed to the immedi¬ 
ate self-expression of the Greek experience and, at the start, not at all 
by entering into what the Greek thinkers themselves explicitly say about 
ifJEvSoq. 


Recapitulation 


To if/evSoq as the opposite of aAqdeq. The relationship between 
the stems of the words aAqdeia and Aavdavcj. Reference to Homer, 
Odyssey, Vlll, 93. The withdrawal of forgetting. 

We are trying to become attentive to the dictum of Parmenides of Elea, 
a thinker who conceived and uttered that dictum around the time the 
temple of Poseidon was constructed in Poseidonia, later Paestum, not 
far from Elea, The dictum of this thinker expresses the word of the 
goddess 'AAqdeia, a name we usually translate as "truth," The essence 
of the goddess "truth" is present throughout the entire edifice of the 
dictum, in each of its verses, but above all and purely in the guiding 
statement, which is precisely silent on the name 'AAqdeia Therefore, 
prior to the elucidation of the individual fragments, and on behalf of 
them, we must learn something of the essence of this goddess; on the 
other hand, only by thinking through the entire "didactic poem" will 
there appear for us the essence of this aAqdeia in its primordial form 
and character. 



26 


The Third Directive [ 38 - 39 ] 


We consider at first the name of the goddess 'AAqdeia, that is, uncon¬ 
cealedness, Of course, the mere fact of learning that "aAqdeia” is the 
way the Greek language expresses "truth" does not tell us anything 
about the essence of truth, as little as we learn something about horses 
by knowing the Latin expression "equus.” But if we translate ctAqdeia 
by "unconcealedness," and thereby transport ourselves into this word's 
directives, then we are no longer constrained within linguistic significa¬ 
tions but stand before an essential nexus that engages our thinking 
down to its very foundations. We are pursuing the four directives pro¬ 
vided by the name 'AAqdeia as translated "unconcealedness," In this 
way we hope to experience something of the primordial essence of 
truth in Greek thought. 

First, un-concealedness refers to concealment. Concealment hence per¬ 
meates the primordial essence of truth. 

Secondly, Mn-concealedness indicates that truth is wrenched from 
concealment and is in conflict with it. The primordial essence of truth 
is conflictual. What "conflict" means here remains a question. 

Thirdly, un-concealedness, in accordance with the just-mentioned 
characterizations, refers to a realm of "oppositions" in which "truth" 
stands. Since it is on the basis of the "oppositional" essence of uncon¬ 
cealedness that its conflictual essence first becomes visible, we have 
to consider more closely the question of the "opposition" in which truth 
stands. Western thinking accounts untruth the sole opposite to truth, 
"Untruth" is identified with "falsity," which, understood as incorrect¬ 
ness, forms the evident and obtrusive counterpart to "correctness," The 
opposition holding sway at the beginning is known to us under the 
names aAqdeia eai ipevdoq, veritas etfalsitas, truth and falsity. We inter¬ 
pret the latter opposition as correctness and incorrectness; but truth 
as "correctness" is not of the same essence as truth in the sense of 
"unconcealedness," The opposition of correctness and incorrectness, 
validity and invalidity, may very well exhaust the oppositional essence 
of truth for later thinking and above all for modern thinking. But that 
decides nothing at all concerning the possible oppositions to "uncon¬ 
cealedness" as thought by the Greeks, 

We must therefore ask how the primordial thinking of the Greeks 
sees the opposition to "unconcealedness," Reflecting on this, we en¬ 
counter the surprising fact that to ipevdoq immediately presents itself 
as the opposite of aAqdeia and aAqdeq; we translate correctly: "the 
false " The opposite of unconcealedness is therefore not concealedness 
but indeed falsity. The word ipevdoc; is of another stem and does not 
immediately say anything about concealing. Which is odd, especially 
since we claim and maintain that the primordial essence of truth is 
"unconcealedness"; for, in that case, the opposition corresponding to 
it, i,e„ contradicting it, must involve something like "concealedness," 



§2 Transformation of the essence of truth [39-411 27 

But that is not what we find at first. For just as soon as the word 
aAqdeq is spoken, so is its counter-word, to ipevSoq. One might then 
be tempted to conclude finally that the essence of truth is in no way 
determined on the basis of unconcealedness and concealment. But per¬ 
haps this is an overly hasty conclusion. We stand too uncritically under 
the prejudice of the opposition between truth and falsity taken for 
granted a long time ago, and we do not take offense at the plurality 
of names signifying it, which we constantly and without much thought 
use as formulas to discriminate our judgments and decrees. Perhaps 
we are not simply being premature when we conclude that, due to 
the pnonty of if/ev8oq, the origin of the essence of truth cannot be 
unconcealedness and concealment. Perhaps there is in fact no room 
at all for “conclusions" here; instead, this is a domain requinng us 
to open our eyes and to see—to see with clear vision. In such "foresight" 
we see that in the experience and speech of the Greeks the counter¬ 
word to aXqdeq, and more generally, the word from which this privative 
formation is denved, is not missing at all, 'AAqdeia is tied to the verbal 
stem da9-, which means "concealing," To the stem da9- pertains the 
verb Aavdavo), "I am concealed"; the aorist participle, Aadcov, Aadov, 
means "being concealed," Yet at first this is only the observation of 
a linguistic fact What is decisive is to see which relations among beings 
are expressed by the word Aavdavo They are of such a kind that we 
are hardly capable of repeating them, and instead, by our way of trans¬ 
lating the Greek word, we cover them over completely, 

Homer says of Odysseus in 0 (VIII), 93: eAdvdave ddxpva Aei'^cov. 
We translate in "correct" German; "He (Odysseus) shed tears, unnoticed 
by the others present," In Greek experience the word of Homer says: 
"He (Odysseus) was in concealment as the one shedding tears," Corre¬ 
spondingly, we translate the famous Epicurean admonition Adds 
Piwoaq as “Live unnoticed"; thought in the Greek way, it says, "Be 
in concealment as one conducting his life," It could be observed with 
regard to these examples that we have here a really interesting linguistic 
fact, that compared to our German modes of expression the Greek lan¬ 
guage expresses itself in a reverse manner. But what we see here is 
more than just “interesting," It is decisive—namely, for an understand¬ 
ing of the primordial essence of truth, whose Greek name, dAqdeia, 
is related to the word Aavddvw, the use of which is now starting to 
dawn upon us. For precisely the way Aavddvo, in the examples just 
referred to, is the ruling word tells us that what is named in this word, 
the “concealed," has a priority in the experience of beings, and, specifi¬ 
cally, as a character of beings themselves it is a possible "object" of 
experience. In the case of the weeping Odysseus, the Greeks do not 
consider that the others present, as human "subjects" in their subjective 
comportment, fail to notice the crying of Odysseus, but they do think 



28 


The Third Directive [ 41-421 


that round about this man and his existence there lies a concealment 
causing the others present to be, as it were, cut off from him. What 
is essential is not the apprehension on the part of the others but that 
there exists a concealment of Odysseus, now keeping the ones who 
are present far from him That a being, in this case the weeping Odys¬ 
seus, can be experienced and grasped depends on whether concealment 
or unconcealment comes to pass. 

In the light of these remarks we will now also consider, more carefully 
than is usual, an ordinary word of the stem da9-, namely Aavdavopai 
or eiiiAavdavofiai. We translate the word, again correctly, "to forget," 
But what does "forget" mean? Modern man, who organizes everything 
in such a way that he can forget it as quickly as possible, should surely 
know what forgetting is. But he does not know. He has forgotten the 
essence of forgetting, supposing he ever did give a thought to it, i,e,, 
extend his thought into the es.sential realm of forgetting. This indiffer¬ 
ence with regard to "forgetting" does not at all depend on the hastiness 
of his "way of life," What is happening here proceeds from the very 
essence of forgetting, which withdraws itself and hides. 

Therefore it could be that an invisible cloud of forgetting itself, the 
oblivion of Being, hangs over the whole sphere of the earth and its 
humanity, a cloud in which is forgotten not this or that being but Being 
itself, a cloud no airplane could ever breach even if capable of the most 
formidable altitude. Accordingly, it could also be that at an appropriate 
time an experience precisely of this oblivion of Being might arise—arise 
as a need, and so be necessary It could be that with a view to this 
forgottenness of Being a remembering might awaken, one thinking of 
Being itself and nothing el.se, considering Being itself in its truth, and 
thinking the truth of Being and not only, as in all metaphysics, beings 
with respect to their Being, For this there would be required, before 
all else, an experience of the essence of forgetting, of that which is 
concealed in the essence of dAqdtiaA 

The Greeks experienced forgetting as a coming to pass of conceal¬ 
ment. 


§3. Clarification of the transformation of ccAqdeia and of the trans¬ 
formation of its counter-essence fveritais, certitudo, rectitude, iustitia, 
truth, justice — Aqdq, falsum, incorrectness, falsity) 


1 Reing and lime is the first attempt to think Being itself out of the basic experience 
of the oblivion of Being l e , it is an attempt to prepare this thinking, to pave the way 
for it, even at the risk of remaining on a “path leading nowhere'" ["Holzweg"] 


§3 Clarification of the transformation [ 42 — 43 ] 


29 


a) The intrinsically different meanings of ipeuSoq and "false." The 
essential domain of the counter-word if/ev6oq as letting-appear 
while covering up. Reference to Homer, Iliad, B 348ff. Dissembling 
concealment: the basic meaning of if/ev6oq. To aipevSet;: the 
"dis-hiding," and the aXqdeq. Reference to Hesiod, Theogony, 
Verse 233f. The ambiguity of aXqdeq. 

In order to clarify the essential relations the Greeks see in the essence 
of ipevSot;, we should first consider briefly how we understand "the 
false,"' 

"The false" means for us, on the one hand, as in the case of "false 
money" or a "false Rembrandt," a falsified thing. Here the false is the 
non-genuine. An assertion, however, can also be "false," In that case, 
the false is the untrue in the sense of incorrect. We also tend to conceive 
an incorrect assertion as an erroneous one, to the extent incorrectness 
as error is opposed to correctness as truth. Nevertheless, not every false 
assertion is an erroneous one. For example, if someone in court makes 
a "false statement," he does not himself have to be in error. In fact, 
he precisely cannot be in error; he must rather know the "true state 
of affairs" in order to be able to make a false statement. Here the false 
is not the erroneous but the deceiving, the misleading. Consequently, 
on the one hand the false is the spurious thing; on the other hand, 
it may be an incorrect assertion; the latter, again, can be a wrong one, 
that is, an erroneous assertion, or it can be a misleading one. We also, 
however, call a man "false", we say, "The police have made a false 
arrest," Here the lalse is neither the falsified, nor the erring, nor the 
misleading, but the "wrong" man—not "identical" with the one being 
sought. This "false" man, as in fact he is, i,c,, the wrong man, can, 
however, be entirely "without falsity," He does not at all have to be 
a "false" man in the sense of one who is, by cunning, generally inclined 
toward deception in his behavior and attitudes. Finally, the term "false," 
in the sense of the wily, is also applied to animals. All cats are false. 
The feline is the false, hence German speaks of false gold and silver 
as "cats' gold" and "cats' silver," 

So it is clear that the false does not always have the same meaning. 
Nevertheless we surmise that the various senses of the false are some¬ 
how related to one same basic essence. But what this latter is remains 
undetermined. 

Likewise the Greek qjevdoq, which we readily translate with the word 
"false," means many different things. We notice that immediately if, 
e,g„ we want to clarify what a pseudonym is This foreign word is 


1 Concerning the word "false,"/a/s»w, see pp 35-38 



30 


The Third Directive [ 43 - 45 ] 


composed of dvofia ("name"), and if/evSoq or, to be more exact, 
ipevSeq. Literally translated, a "pseudonym" is a "false name," Is it 
really so? Not at all. If an impostor assumes a noble name and travels 
under this "false name," he is not then bearing a "pseudonym," The 
noble name is indeed supposed to conceal who its bearer is "in truth," 
Nevertheless, the "false name" of the impostor is no mere cover name. 
Such a name is used for military operations, for example the "operation 
Michael" on the Western front in the previous war. This name simply 
covers something that is in no way to appear. On the contrary, however, 
the assumed name of an impostor not only covers up his "true nature"; 
in addition, while covering, it also has to let the bearer of the name 
appear in "grandeur," a grandeur which to be sure does not belong 
to him, as little as does the name. In contradistinction, the "pseudo¬ 
nym" is neither simply a false name nor a cover name, nor even a 
name that is simply misleading The "pseudonym," i,e„ the essentially 
fitting name, is indeed supposed to cover up an author; yet in a certain 
way it also has to let him come into the open, and in fact not as one 
he in truth is not (the case of the impostor), but as the one he really 
is. Thus Kierkegaard published in 1843, in Copenhagen, this work: 
Fear and TYembling The Dialectical Lyric of Johannes de Silentio This "Lord 
Silence" intended to intimate hereby something essential about himself 
and his literary activity. Similarly the "pseudonyms" of Kierkegaard's 
two books Philosophical Fragments (1844) and TYaining in Christianity 
(1850) stand in an essential relation. The first bears the name of the 
author Johannes Climacus; the other is published by Anti-Climacus, 
The meaning of ipevSoq in "pseudonym" eludes us if we translate 
it as "false," We have here a covering that at the same time unveils 
something recondite and does so in a specifically recondite way, 
whereas a "false name," e,g„ that of the impostor, is also not simply 
incorrect, but it covers up while making visible something pertaining 
only to the facade and to the most unrecondite 

Under the force of the essential relations named by the Greek word 
tpevdog, we have already spoken, almost "automatically," of "cover¬ 
ing," and "veiling," but at the same time also of "letting-appear," V^ev- 
Sog pertains to the essential realm of covenng, hence it is a kind of 
concealing. The covering involved in ipev5og, however, is always at 
the same moment an unveiling, a showing, and a bringing into appear¬ 
ance, Now it is time, however, to leave the word to the Greeks them¬ 
selves, so we may have a witness testifying that, and to what extent, 
if/evdog belongs to the essential realm of concealing and unconcealed¬ 
ness, Let us cite two places, the one from Homer, the other from Hesiod, 
These places ["Stellen"] are not mere authorities [“Belegstellen"], which 
by the simple accumulation of a large number would gain demonstra¬ 
tive power; for it is not a matter here of demonstrating and arguing. 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [45-46] 


31 


but of a pointing out that opens our eyes. What is decisive here is 
not the sheer number of the places, in the quotation of which generally 
one place is left in darkness as much as the others, in the expectation 
that the one unclear place would clarify the others and then that the 
darkness of all the places taken together would result in clarity. What 
is decisive is the transparency of the essential in one single place. To 
be sure, it might be necessary to refer to several of these places, if it 
is necessary to make the same thing visible under different aspects. 
For now, it only matters to acknowledge that ipevSoq belongs in the 
essential domain of appearing, and letting-appear, and of unconcealed¬ 
ness. 

The quotation from Homer is taken from the second book of the 
Iliad (B 348ff,), Here the poet has Nestor say that for the Greeks there 
is no hope of returning home from the battlefield of TYoy: 

iif>iv xai 4 !(><,' aiYt6\oi() 

yvcopevai ei if ififvdix; li' if xai ovxi 

Voss translates' 

(as) "previously, from the lightning-thrower we knew whether 

he was out to deceive us or not " 

The reference is to Zeus, and the event called to mind took place 
the day the Greeks in Argos boarded their ships to go to TYoy, 

aaipaiiicov Fvaiaip.a m]p.aia ipaiviov 

Voss translates: 

"On the nght his lightning flashed, a sign portending good fortune " 

Literally translated, the verse says, "Zeus, slinging his lightning bolts 
to the right and letting appear propitious signs." In the first passage 
quoted these signs are called vnooxeoiq. The best translation would 
be our word "reservation," but this is fixed too much in a certain direc¬ 
tion of meaning because of the Latin word reservatio. ‘Yn6oxeoi(; means 
a holding out and holding forth, a showing which holds forth and at 
the same time holds something back, and hence does not show. It be¬ 
longs to the essence of the oqpa, the sign, that it itself shines (shows 
itself) and in this appearing also indicates something else; the sign, in 
appearing itself, lets something else appear. The lightning bolts going 
to the right are a portent. Since they are on the right, they let something 
propitious appear, though to be sure in such a way that they, as signs, 
still hold back and veil the outlook of the upcoming course of the cam- 



32 


The Third Directive [ 46 - 48 ] 


paign against TYoy. And now, according to the word of Nestor, it is 
time to determine whether or not the portent from Zeus is if/ev6oq 
or not. When is it tpevSoq? If the bolts going to the right, as signs 
of propitious destiny, conceal the actual disaster still withheld from the 
Greeks though already allotted to them. 'Vevboq applies, as Homer says 
simply, to Zeus a/y/rara (pai'vov, to Zeus in the way of his letting signs 
appear. He always lets something appear in the signs. He holds out 
something unconcealed. At the same time, however, the sign conceals, 
and indeed as sign, always only denoting and referring, but never 
openly displaying what it refers to in the same way it itself, as self¬ 
showing, appears. Such a sign is in every case a concealing that shows. 
But the question remains whether this type of concealment only holds 
back (i.e., holds back the glimpse into destiny) or whether it is a show¬ 
ing whose concealing aspect dissembles what is to come. In that case, 
the holding forth on the part of the showing which appears, and thereby 
the sign itself, are ipevSoc;. The concealing is a dissembling. The guiding 
basic meaning of ipevdoc; resides in dissembling (obstructing or disguis¬ 
ing). Thereby we must take this word in its literal sense, which is still 
familiar to us. "Dissembling" does not yet mean here self-disguising 
as the deceptive character of a person; it is not, in modern terms, a 
comportment of the "subject," but is rather an "objective" event occur- 
nng in the realm of beings. We say a house in the neighborhood is 
obstructing the view of the mountains. Dissembling as ob-structing is 
first of all a concealing in the manner of covering up. We cover up, 
e.g., a door that is not supposed to be seen in the room, and disguise 
it by placing a cupboard in front of it. In this way an appeanng sign, 
a gesture, a name, a word, can also disguise something. The cupboard 
placed before the door not only presents itself as this thing and not 
only disguises the door by covering over—i.e., concealing—the wall 
which at this place has an opening, but, rather, the cupboard can be 
disguising to the point that it pretends there is no door at all in the 
wall. The cupboard disguises the door, and by being placed before it, 
it distorts the "actual" state of the wall. Our language contains the beau¬ 
tiful word "to hide" [verhehlen]; the originally simple "concealing" is 
called veiling [verhiillen]. "Hiding" refers to concealing and concealed¬ 
ness; to "hide nothing," to make "no secret" out of something, signifies 
there is no mystery to it, nothing concealed. To the same word stem 
as "hiding" belongs our word "hole," the hideaway, the hidden place 
that can itself contain something and conceal it. Our German language, 
which is more and more delivered over to corruption, once even had 
the word "dis-hide" [emhehlen]: to bring something out of hiddenness, 
to take it out of concealedness, dis-close it— aAqdtia: dis-closure. For 
years I have used "disclose" [embergen] as the counter-word to "con- 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [48-49] 


33 


cealing closure" [verbergen]. The ordinary sophisticated reader of news¬ 
papers obviously will consider such words an artificial mishandling of 
language, which "philosophers" "think up" for the sake of their stilted 
ways of "abstract" thought. 

Vev8oq is a dissembling concealment, "hiding" in the stricter sense. 
The essential relation between "the false," as the opposite of the true, 
and concealing as the opposite of disclosure (the occurrence of uncon¬ 
cealedness) now becomes clear. And in this light the Greeks' opposition 
of aXqdeq and ipevSoq no longer seems odd, 'Vev8eq in the sense of 
dissembling concealment, i,e,, hiding, permits the corresponding priva¬ 
tive formation to a-if/ev6eq, i,e,, the non-hiding, the dis-hiding. The 
essence of ctipevSeg must therefore be determined in reference to 
aXqdeq, "the unconcealed." Hesiod bears witness to this. In his Theog- 
ony (Verse 233f.) the poet relates that IlovToqas npEopuiaiov naiSov, 
the oldest and most venerable of his sons, testified: Nqpea 6’ aipevSea 
xai aXqdea —Nereus, the one who does not dissemble, who hides 
nothing— xai aAqdea: i,e„ precisely the one who "does not conceal," 
The xafdoes not simply add the dAqdqg io the dif/evSqg; and neither 
is dAqdqq jusl a repetition of diptvSqg, as if the same thing were being 
said twice. The sense here is rather that the non-hiding is grounded 
in the non-concealing, Nereus is without falsity precisely by reason of 
his relation to unconcealedness. The ipevdog receives its essence from 
the region of concealment. The non-hiding is the non-concealing; 
dAqdeg. 

But here an objection arises, one we do not want to take too lightly: 
TO dAqdeq indeed means "the unconcealed" and in no way means, 
if we adhere strictly to the word, the "non-concealing," Nevertheless 
that is how we have to understand dAqdeq. The Greeks knew the Adyoq 
dAqdqq, i,e„ the true assertion, the one which is not concealing but 
disconcealing, Adyog dAqdqg does not mean, as might seem from the 
form of the words, the disclose^/ assertion but, instead, the disclosm^, 
true assertion, which as such can very well be concealed and does not 
have to be unconcealed. The same holds a fortiori with dAqdeia. It 
expresses "unconcealedness," the unconcealed, but also means "un- 
hiddenness" or disclosure in the sense of non-hiding or non¬ 
concealing. 

For a long time now, of course, thinking, and especially modern 
thinking, has found no difficulty here. The matter is said to be quite 
simple, ’AAqdrg in the sense of "unconcealed" applies to the "objects" 
that appear to us, and dAqdeg in the sense of "non-concealing" applies 
to assertions and knowledge about "objects," thus to the comportment 
of the "subject" toward objects. This solution sounds convincing. But 
it rests on the presupposition that in the realm of dAqdeia and dAqdeq, 



34 


The Third Directive [ 49 - 50 ] 


i.e., for the Greeks, there would be something like the distinction be¬ 
tween "object" and "subject" and the so-called subject-object relation. 
But it is precisely the essence of aAqdeia that makes it impossible for 
something like the subject-object relation to arise. Hence it would con¬ 
fuse everything and stand matters upside down if we attempted to clar¬ 
ify the apparent equivocity of aXqdeq and oAqdeia with the help of 
the subject-object distinction. 

But aAqdeq is in fact ambiguous, and indeed in a manner almost 
unbearable to a Greek ear, since dAqdeq means precisely the uncon¬ 
cealed and remains distinct from the "non-concealing," But what is 
distinct does not have to be separated; perhaps it belongs to a unity. 
The one, which is thus two-fold, would then be ambiguous. To the 
unconcealed belongs disclosure. What discloses is related to the dis¬ 
closed and the unconcealed, 'AAqdeq and the corresponding aAqdeia 
are ambiguous. How does this ambiguity anse? Upon what is it 
grounded, if indeed it exists at all? Or do we have here merely the 
semblance of ambiguity^ Up to now only this has become clear; if 
aAqdeq is ambiguous insofar as it means both "disclosing" and "the 
disclosed," then it is inappropriate to claim ctAqdeq means the "uncon¬ 
cealed," If in fact the disclosed is only what it is on the basis of a disclos¬ 
ing, then precisely the sense of "disclosing" is the onginal meaning 
of dAqdeq. And insofar as dAqdeq is properly said of eiioq and Aeyeiv, 
then it appears on the whole that dAqdeia is originally characteristic 
of the word, of speech, and of asserting. Nevertheless, for the Greeks, 
and still in Aristotle, dAqdeia is a character of beings and not a charac- 
tenstic of the perceiving of beings and of assertions about them. What 
then is onginally disclosing {dAqdeq). speech {Aeyeiv), or beings (dv), 
or neither one? 

Before we answer these questions, which aim at the heart of the 
matter of the essence of dAqdeia, we must first take the measure of 
this essential realm in its broad extent. That means we have to consider 
the essence of concealment still more profoundly. The false in the sense 
of ipevSoq as dissemblance is a concealing. But then is every concealing 
necessarily a dissembling? Is every concealedness in itself already "fal¬ 
sity"? In order to make a decision here, the essential realm of conceal¬ 
ment must first come closer to us. 

Before we take a far-sighted look into the domain of the essence 
of concealment, however, we must first present the elucidation we have 
held back up to now because it could only be understood after the 
clarification of the essence of tpevdoq for the Greeks, So we must clarify 
what the word "false" denotes, and a brief illumination needs to be 
given of the significance of the priority of the false within the essential 
determination of the "untrue," 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [51-52] 


35 


Recapitulation 


1) The so-called correct translation of ipevSoq by "false." The 

manifold meanings of "false" and tpevdoq. The dissembling and 
hiding of tpevSoq in the region of the essence of concealment and 
unveiledness. Reference to Homer and Hesiod. 

We are inquiring into the opposite of "truth" with the intention of clari¬ 
fying the essence of the goddess 'AXqdaa. Everyone knows this oppo¬ 
site, "Falsity" is what is opposed to truth. This opposite is, as we say, 
so "natural" that we encounter it everywhere and constantly move 
within it. Therefore a "philosophy" is not required in order to bring 
to light the opposition between the "true and false," The early Greeks 
already knew the opposition to aXqdeq — to ipevSoc;. We translate cor¬ 
rectly: the true and the false. The translation is "correct" to this extent, 
that the Greek words to dAqde<; xai to ipevSoq do not mean "the good 
and the bad," which is in Greek to dyoi^dv xai to xaxov. Yet the Greek 
word to ctAqdec; does not mean "the true" but "the unconcealed," The 
counter-word to dAqdrc; in Greek, namely ipt vdoq, does not, however, 
contain immediately in its form or in its stem anything of "concealed¬ 
ness," But we "really" should expect that, precisely because from the 
earliest Greek times to ipevSoq occurs univocally and decisively, and 
hence everywhere, as the opposite to dAqdet;. But, and this is what 
is really remarkable here, we in fact do not expect of ipevSoc;, as the 
evident opposite of dAqdec;, the unconcealed, a relation to the sphere 
of meaning of concealing and non-concealing. Why not? On the one 
hand because it has already been a long time since dAqdeq was still 
thought of as the "unconcealed," i,e , because we no longer experience 
unconcealedness and cannot experience it. Instead, we understand 
dAqdec; as the verum and certum, as the "true" and the "certain," main¬ 
taining that what is "understood" is, as it were, self-evidently "true" 
and "certain," On the other hand, the truly uncanny riddle of the Greek 
opposition of dAi]de<; and if/tvSo<; is not a problem at all since it has 
equally become customary, long ago, to understand ipevdoc; as "the 
false," Of course we recognize, already in this brief reflection, that what 
we so straightforwardly and "massively" call the "false" bears in its 
essence a special richness. 

The false is, in one case, the falsified thing, i,e„ the spurious ("false 
money," a "false Rembrandt"), The false is, secondly, an assertion: false 
in the sense of incorrect, or as we also say, erroneous. But a "false 
statement," e g„ made in court, docs not ipso facto have to be erro¬ 
neous, He who in such circumstances speaks "falsely" may precisely 



36 


The Third Directive [ 52-541 


not be in error about the state of affairs if he is to be able to say what 
is not the case. This sort of “false statement" is not erroneous but is, 
rather, misleading. We also call a person “false," We say, “The police 
made a false arrest," and here “false" means “wrong," Yet the falsely 
arrested, the wrong man, does not have to be a “false man" in the 
sense of one who behaves in a cunning way and who poses everywhere 
as someone he is not. And, in the sense of the wily, we also call animals 
"false," All cats are false. The feline is "the" false; hence the origin 
of speaking, as Germans do, of "cats' gold" and "cats' silver," 

The Greek ipevSoc; has many meanings, just as does our word "false," 
This becomes apparent if we attempt to elucidate the foreign word 
"pseudonym," Literally translated, this ipevSoq-ovoiia is a "false 
name." A pseudonym, however, is no "false name," for it is in fact 
appropriate to the one bearing it. The term "false name" applies, rather, 
to an impostor, e,g,, "Count So-and-so," This name is indeed supposed 
to cover up its bearer, although the name used by the impostor is again 
not a mere "cover name" like the sort of names used in military opera¬ 
tions ("Operation Michael") or in espionage. The name of the impostor 
is, of course, supposed to cover, but at the same time it is to let the 
one who bears the name appear in grandeur and to provide for his 
"stepping out" under the corresponding title. To be sure, what the cov¬ 
ering name lets appear at the same time, the grandeur, is here only 
"semblance," In contradistinction to the impostor's name, the genuine 
"pseudonym" actually manifests something of the "true being" of its 
bearer. The "pseudonym" also covers up, but in such a way that it 
indicates simultaneously the recondite, concealed essence of the author 
and his literary task. The genuine pseudonym does not simply make 
the author unknown; it is meant, rather, to call attention to his con¬ 
cealed essence. By using a pseudonym the author expresses even more 
about himself than he does when he employs his "correct" name, 
Kierkegaard's pseudonyms ("Johannes de Silentio," "Job, Climacus," 
"Anti-climacus") bring out this essence of the pseudonym and conse¬ 
quently the essence of if/evSog. VevSog involves a covering that simul¬ 
taneously unveils, "False" gold looks like gold, shows itself as gold, 
and in doing so—though of course only by doing so—it hides what 
it is in truth: non-gold. The essence of ipevdoq finds its determination 
in the domain of concealing, unveiling, and letting-appear. 

The objection can always be raised against this understanding of ipev- 
Soq that it is but our "interpretation " Therefore we need to know how 
the Greeks themselves experienced ipevdog. Two places from early 
Greek poetry are indicative The one is from Homer's Iliad, the other 
from Hesiod's Theogony, The passage from the Iliad (B, 348ff) deals 
with the question of whether or not Zeus's sign, lightning bolts flashing 
on the right, is gjevfyoq, i.e., whether he is unveiling or concealing the 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [54-55] 


37 


"true" destiny alloted to the Greeks. "To be ijjevdoq” or "to be not 
if/evSoq” presupposes here that Zeus lets something or other appear 
in the first place. In fact Homer speaks of Zeus (pai'vcjv, Zeus who lets 
something appear. But "to let appear" is indeed to unveil. How then 
can he conceal? Zeus must let something come into appearance; how¬ 
ever, such a thing, while it shows itself, at the same time only foreshad¬ 
ows or portends, and hence does not completely unveil but simultane¬ 
ously shrouds. This is the manner of the showing of signs: a/y/rara. 
It is therefore that Zeus is called in this passage Zevc; a/y/rara (paivov — 
the one who lets signs appear, A "sign" is that which, in appearing 
and pointing out, thereby lets something else appear—though in such 
a way that it does not relegate this to the manifest (where the sign 
itself appears) but precisely holds it back, i.e,, veils. This self-appearance 
and self-disclosure, which also veils something by holding it back, is 
precisely what showing is. Only where there holds sway a letting appear 
and, hence, a disclosing, does there exist the free play for the possibility 
of ipevdoc;, i.e., the showing that also covers and holds back. The es¬ 
sence of if/ev6oq resides in an exhibiting that conceals, or, we could 
say, it resides in a dissembling. 

We must nevertheless think this "dissembling" (obstructing, disguis¬ 
ing) as both a process and a state of affairs. A neighboring house "ob¬ 
structs" the self-showing of the mountain; a cupboard put in front of 
the door "disguises" the wall at that place and presents it thereby as 
a wall that is not broken up. The cupboard disguises—on the one hand 
by covering up the hole in the wall, and also, at the same time, by 
making appear and presenting an unbroken wall. The disguising is a 
hiding. This old German word {Verhehlen) denves from hehlen (hide, 
secrete), which means "to conceal." "Hiddenness" is concealment. We 
now use "dissembling" and "hiding"—and indeed in a "negative" 
sense—for the most part only with reference to human behavior, which 
we understand as "subjective" in opposition to "objective" events. "Dis¬ 
sembling" is for us "self-dissembling," and this becomes, in relation 
to others, "deceiving." Similarly, "hiding" also is used in a subjective 
sense: not to hide something to oneself, not to fool oneself, i.e., not 
to delude oneself, not to dissemble to oneself: to be "without a hidden 
secret," without concealment, and without veiling digression, i.e., in 
the case of an action or a communication. Originally, however, "hiding" 
meant any kind of "concealing"; the older German language knew even 
the word—which has since been lost—"dis-hide" [enthehlen]-. to take 
out of concealedness. For many years I have used in my lectures the 
word "dis-close" [Embergen]. In case there should come a time when 
we are again capable of experiencing dis-closure and unconcealedness 
{dArjdeia), we might also find again the lost word "dis-hiding" and 
appropriate it anew, "Hiding" [Hehlen] is, moreover, closely related to 



38 The Third Directive [55—561 

"hole" [Hohle], a hideaway that conceals something while it itself re¬ 
mains unconcealed. 

Since to if/evdoq, according to the testimony of Homer, belongs to 
the essential realm of hiding, i.e., concealing and disconcealing, the 
Greek opposition of the otherwise unrelated words (iAijdec; and ipev&)c; 
no longer seems odd. The Greeks think in if/Fvdoi; a concealing, and 
we must not forget that ipev&x; is used of "signs," e g, lightning; thus 
ipt'v&x; does not merely characterize human behavior. Of course it is 
often used of eiiot;, pvdoc;, and Uynv, of the word and of speech. But 
even "the word" is for the Greeks primordially not just a formation 
produced by the "human subject." Because the Greeks think in if/eOfyaq 
concealing as an event, therefore even if/evf)(><^, veiling, can now be¬ 
come a point of departure for the formation of a counter-word which 
means the "non-false," and hence the "true," and for which the ordi¬ 
nary word for "true," namely to dAi]dF<;, is not needed. The opposite 
of "hiding" is "dis-hiding," Tlie "dis" is in Greek to ipt vdoc; and 
ipfvdet; is opposed ctifJtvdt'q, the not-hiding, Hesiod gives simple, univo- 
cal information concerning this word and its basic meaning (Theogony, 
verse 233) Nereus, the oldest and most venerable son of the God of 
the sea Ilovioq, is called dijjtvbta xai dAijdta, "the one who does 
not dissemble"; kqi does not mean here simply "and," but it denotes 
an explaining "because," Nereus is "the one who does not dissemble," 
because he is the d.H/dr/c '—because he is the not-concealing, V^evbrjc; 
is determined on the basis of "-fr/i^r/c " I» dAqdet; now means, "liter¬ 
ally" translated, before all else "the unconcealed," "the disclosed " 
Something unconcealed, disclosed, e g„ a piece of rock, does not have 
to be "disclosing," Indeed in this case, the unconcealed and disclosed, 
the piece of rock, can never be "disclosing" at all. On the contrary, 
what is "disclosing" is man's speech and perception 

The Greeks denote, however, the "disclosed" as well as the "disclos¬ 
ing" with the same word d\i]de\, which literally means the "uncon¬ 
cealed," At any rate, we maintain that the translation of dAqOtc; as 
"the unconcealed" is the only "literal" one. But now it can be seen 
that d.h/dr'c, in the double sense of "disclosed" and "disclosing," is 
ambiguous. We come to know this ambiguity very clearly on the detour 
through ipevSoi, and its counter-word dipevbe\. We also realize that 
mysterious relations obtain here. In order to appreciate the essence of 
the ambiguity of dAi]dt\' and, above all, to experience its ground, we 
have first to traverse the realm of essence of un-concealedness and dis¬ 
closure in its broad extent. That means we must first consider the es¬ 
sence of concealment in a more penetrating way, in the sense 

of dissembling is a concealing. But is then every concealing necessarily 
a dissembling? Is every concealediiess in itself already ifjtvdot;, i,e„ "fal¬ 
sity"? And what about "concealing closure" and its various modes? 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [57-581 


39 


b) The un-German word "false." Fakum, fallo, o(paAAo). The 
Roman priority of "overthrowing" in the Latinization of ancient 
Greece through the imperium (command) as essential ground of 
iustum. The transporting of ipevSoq into the Roman-imperial do¬ 
main of overthrowing. The real event of history: the assault of 
Latinizing in the Greek-Roman domain of history and the mod¬ 
ern view of the Greek world through Roman eyes. 

"False"—what are we to say about this word? "False" derives from 
the Latin fakum. We would do well to become attentive at last, and 
remain attentive, to what the Brothers Grimm (German Dictionary, III, 
1291), who must know, note under this word with a tone of wrath 
[Ingrimm] : ‘‘¥a\se,falsus, an un-German word of which there is no trace 
in Ulfilas," An "un-German word"—he who is not too faint-hearted 
will be alarmed at this observation and will never again get rid of his 
dismay. The word "false" \falsch] entered the German language in the 
early Christian Middle Ages through the Latin fakum. The stem of the 
Latin word fakum (fallo) is "fall" and is related to the Greek o(pdAAo), 
i,e„ to overthrow, bring to a downfall, fell, make totter. But this Greek 
word o(paAAo) never became the genuine counter-word opposed to 
dAqdeq. I deliberately .say "genuine," because the Greek o(pdAAo) can 
sometimes be translated "correctly" by "deceiving"; what is meant, 
however, thought in the Greek way, is "making totter," "making stag¬ 
ger," "letting stumble into erring," But man can be led into such totter¬ 
ing and falling in the midst of the beings appearing to him only if some¬ 
thing is put in his way obstructing beings, so that he does not know 
what he is dealing with. First something must be held forth and set 
forth, and then something else entirely must be delivered, so that man 
can "fall for" what is presented that way and thereby fall down Bring¬ 
ing to a fall in the sense of misleading first becomes possible on the 
basis of a putting forth, dissembling, and concealing. Following a perva¬ 
sive ambiguity, o(pdAAo) is related to "putting something up"; thought 
in the Greek way, that means to place something in the unconcealed 
and to let what thus stands there appear as enduring, i,c., as presencing. 
L<pdAAo) is opposed to such putting up insofar as it does not let the 
presencing stand in its standing-there but overthrows it, for it puts up 
something else in place of it and alleges that what is put up is what 
stands. I'd do(paAtq means the un-falling, what remains standing in 
its abiding and endunng, i,e„ in Greek, remains in its presencing into 
the unconcealed. I'd do(paAeq is never the "certain" and the "secure" 
in the modern sense of certitudo. 

Because the bringing to a fall, in every sense, is only a subsequent 
effect within the field of the essence of dissembling and concealing 
(which constitute the essence of ipevSoq), therefore what is connected 



40 


The Third Directive [ 58 - 59 ] 


with "falling" and bringing to a fall cannot for the Greeks be the original 
and proper opposite to "unconcealedness," to dAqdeq. 

Why, however, is the falsum, the "bringing to a fall," essential for 
the Romans? What realm of experience is normative here, if the bring¬ 
ing to a fall attains such a priority that on the basis of its essence there 
is determined the counter-essence to what the Greeks experience as 
dAqdet;, the "unconcealing" and the "unconcealed"^ 

The realm of essence decisive for the development of the Latin falsum 
is the one of the imperium and of the "impenal." We will take these 
words in their strict and original sense. Imperium means "command." 
To be sure, we now understand the word "command" in a later, Latin- 
romanic, sense. Originally "command" \Befehl\ (the "h" should be writ¬ 
ten after the "1": befelh) meant the same as "to cover"' to "commit" 
(command) the dead to the earth or to the fire, to entrust them to 
a cover. The original meaning of "command" survives in our expression, 
"I commend (command) thy ways to the Lord" (i,e„ entrust to protec¬ 
tion and sheltering cover). This commending is preserved in our word 
"recommend," Instead of "recommend," Luther always used the word 
"commend"— commendare. On its way through the French language, 
"commend" became commandieren, i e., more precisely, the Latin 
imperare, im-parare = to arrange, to take measures, i.e„ prae-cipere, to 
occupy in advance, and so to take possession of the occupied territory 
and to rule it, Imperium is the territory [Gebiet] founded on command¬ 
ments [Gebot], in which the others are obedient [boimdsig]. Imperium 
is the command in the sense of commandment. Command, thus under¬ 
stood, is the basis of the essence of domination, not the consequence 
of it and certainly not just a way of exercising domination. The God 
of the Old Testament is a "commanding" God; His word is: "Thou shalt 
not," "Thou shalt," This "shalt" is written down on the tables of the 
law. The gods of the Greeks are not commanding gods but, rather, ones 
that give signs, that point. The Roman gods, quite to the contrary, are 
designated by the Latin word numen, which means "bidding" and "will" 
and has the character of command. The "numinous," strictly taken, 
does not at all touch the essence of the Greek gods, i.e,, gods who 
dwell in the region of dAqdaa. In the essential realm of the "command" 
belongs the Roman "law," ius. This word is connected with jubeo: to 
bid, to let something be done by bidding and to determine it through 
this doing and letting. The command is the essential ground of domina¬ 
tion and of iusium, as understood in Latin, the "to-be-in-the-right" and 
the "to have a right." Accordingly, iustitia has a wholly different ground 
of essence than that of Si'xq, which arises from dAqdeia. 

Command, as the essential ground of domination, includes being- 
supenor, which is only possible as the constant surmounting of others, 
who are thereby the inferiors. In this surmounting there resides again 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [60-61] 


41 


the constant ability to oversee. We say that to "oversee" something 
means to "dominate" it. This overseeing, which includes the surmount¬ 
ing, involves a constant "being-on-the-watch," That is the form of act¬ 
ing which oversees everything but still keeps to itself: in Latin, the aaio 
of the actus. The surmounting overseeing denotes the dominating 
"sight" expressed in the often quoted phrase of Caesar: veni, vidi, vici —I 
came, I oversaw, and I conquered. Victory is only the effect of Caesar's 
seeing and overseeing, whose proper character is actio. The essence of 
the imperium resides in the actus of constant "action." The imperial actio 
of the constant surmounting of others includes the sense that the others, 
should they rise to the same or even to a neighboring level of command, 
will be brought down—in Launfallere (participle: falsum). This bnnging 
to a fall pertains necessarily to the imperial realm. The bringing to a 
fall can occur in a "direct" attack and overthrowing. The other can, 
however, also be brought down by being "tripped up" from behind 
in a furtive way. The bringing to a fall is then subterfuge, "trick" [Trick], 
which word, not accidentally, comes from the "English," Subterfuge 
is, considered from the outside, the roundabout and therefore mediate 
bringing to a fall versus immediate overthrowing. Thereby the fallen 
are not destroyed but are in a certain way raised up again—within 
the limits fixed by the dominating ones. This "fixing" is in Latin pango, 
whence the word pax —peace. This is, imperially thought, the fixed situ¬ 
ation of the fallen. Actually, to compass someone's downfall in the sense 
of subterfuge and roundabout action is not the mediate and derived, 
but the really genuine, imperial actio. The properly "great" feature of 
the imperial resides not in war but in the fallere of subterfuge as round¬ 
about action and in the pressing-into-service for domination. The battles 
against the Italian cities and tribes, by means of which Rome secured 
its terntory and expansion, make manifest the unmistakable procedure 
of roundabout action and encirclement through treaties with tnbes lying 
further out. In the Latin fallere, to bring down, as subterfuge, there 
resides "deceiving"; the falsum is treachery and deception, "the false," 
What happens when the Greek ipevSoc; is thought in the sense of 
the Latin falsum! The Greek iptufiog, as hiding and consequently also 
as "deceiving," is now no longer experienced and interpreted on the 
basis of concealing but instead on the basis of subterfuge. The Greek 
ipevSog, by being translated into the Latin falsum, is transported into 
the Roman-imperial domain of bringing to a downfall, Vevfioq, dissem¬ 
bling and concealing, now becomes what fells, the false. Thus it is clear 
that Roman expenence and thinking, organizing and expanding, con¬ 
structing and working, from their essential outset never moved within 
the region of ctAqdeio and ipevSoc;. As a kind of historiographical con- 
statation, it has been known for a long time now that the Romans 
took things over from the Greeks in many ways and that this appropria- 




42 


The Third Directive [ 61 - 63 ] 


tion was also a recasting. One day we must consider in what regions 
of essence and out of what background this Romanizing of Greece came 
to pass. The transformation of ifjevdoq, i,e,, the appropriation of "con¬ 
cealing" into the sense of "bringing to a fall," extends so far that the 
Latin language even adopts the construction and the use of the Greek 
word Xavdavo), "I am concealed," This transformative adoption is fa¬ 
vored through the Indo-germanic affinity between the Greek and Latin 
languages, Greek says: Xavdavei qxov, we correctly translate: "He 
comes unnoticed," But thought in the Greek way it says: "He is con¬ 
cealed as the one who is coming," The Roman historiographer Livy 
says: fallit hostis incedens. In our language: "The enemy approaches un¬ 
noticed," Closer to the Latin: "The enemy deceives as the one who 
is approaching," But what the sentence really says is: "The enemy, as 
the one approaching, bnngs to a fall," That is absurd and makes sense 
only \ffallere, as bringing to a fall, is thought in the sense of subterfuge, 
which in turn is thought as deceiving and then as hiding. The Greek 
ifJEvdoq was appropriated, but without an expenence of the essential 
domain of concealment that is normative here. Similarly, Livy speaks 
of a man, qui natus moriensque fefellit. Our German language would 
render it: "who was born unknown and died unknown," According 
to the Roman way of thinking: "who at his birth and at his death 
brought men to a fall and misled them," But what Livy says can be 
made meaningful if thought in the Greek manner: "At his birth and 
at his death concealedness surrounded him," A newborn is unlikely, 
at his birth, to "trip up" his fellow men, though that is precisely what 
the Latin word says, and bring them to a fall, or even simply deceive 
them. But surely, on the contrary, he can dwell in concealedness. The 
Latin fefellit signifies another realm of essence than that of the Greek 
eAavdave. The Latin falsum is alien to the Greek if/evfioq. 

The domination of the Romans and their transformation of Hellenism 
are in no way limited, however, to individual institutions of the Greek 
world or to single attitudes and "modes of expression" of Greek human¬ 
ity, Nor does the Latinization of the Greek world by the Romans amount 
simply to the sum of everything they have appropriated. What is deci¬ 
sive is that the Latinization occurs as a transformation of the essence of 
truth and Being within the essence of the Greco-Roman domain of his¬ 
tory, This transformation is distinctive in that it remains concealed but 
nevertheless determines everything in advance. This transformation of 
the essence of truth and Being is the genuine event of history. The 
imperial as the mode of Being of a historical humanity is nevertheless 
not the basis of the essential transformation of ctAqdeia into veritas, 
as rectitudo, but is its consequence, and as this consequence it is in turn 
a possible cause and occasion for the development of the true in the 
sense of the correct. To speak of the "transformation of the essence 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [63-64] 


43 


of truth" is admittedly only an expedient; for it is still to speak of truth 
in an objectifying way over and against the way it itself comes to pres¬ 
ence and history "is." The transformation of the essence of truth like¬ 
wise supports that domain in which the historically observable nexuses 
of Western history are grounded. That is why the historical state of 
the world we call the modern age, following historiographical chronol¬ 
ogy, is also founded on the event of the Romanizing of Greece. The 
"Renaissance" of the ancient world accompanying the outset of the 
modern period is unequivocal proof of this. A more remote, but by 
no means indifferent, consequence of the Romanizing of Greece and 
of the Roman rebirth of antiquity is the fact that we today still see 
the Greek world with Roman eyes—and indeed not solely within histo¬ 
riographical research into ancient Greece but also, and this is the only 
decisive thing, within the historical metaphysical dialogue of the mod¬ 
ern world with that of the ancients The metaphysics of Nietzsche, 
whom we like to consider the modern rediscoverer of ancient Greece, 
sees the Greek "world" exclusively in a Roman way, i.e., in a way 
at once modern and un-Greek. Similarly, we still think the Greek noAic; 
and the "political" in a totally un-Greek fashion. We think the "politi¬ 
cal" as Romans, i.e., imperially. The essence of the Greek noAiq will 
never be grasped within the horizon of the political as understood in 
the Roman way. As soon as we consider the simple unavoidable essen¬ 
tial domains, which are for a historiographer naturally of no conse¬ 
quence, since they are inconspicuous and noiseless, then, but only then, 
do we see that our usual basic ideas, i.e., Roman, Chnstian, modern 
ones, miserably fail to grasp the primordial essence of ancient Greece. 


Recapitulation 


2) Reconsideration of the essence of the "false" and of the hiding 
and "dis-hiding" of ipevSoq. The rule of the Roman imperial 
"high command" and the breadth of the distinction between 
ipevSoq and falsutn. 

We are considering the essence of ipevdoq, a word usually rendered 
"false." But for what purpose are we "busying" ourselves with the false, 
supposing we are "busy" here at all? Indeed we desire the true, and 
it is difficult enough to try to find it and preserve it. We want the "posi¬ 
tive." Why then all this brain-racking over the negative? These are all 
legitimate questions. 

But in our meditation it is not the false itself we are pursuing. We 
are reflecting "only" on the essence of the false And the essence of 



44 


The Third Directive [ 64 - 65 ] 


the false is not itself something false. It is so far removed from that 
that the essence of the false might even participate in what is most 
essential to the essence of the true. It could indeed be so difficult to 
find the truth, and therefore we find it so rarely, because we do not 
know, and do not want to know, anything about the essence of the 
false. It could be that we are wandering about in an uncanny delusion 
if we believe the essence of the negative is itself something “negative." 
Who knows nothing of the essence of death lacks every trace of a 
knowledge of the essence of "life." The essence of death is not a non¬ 
essence. The essence of negativity is nothing negative, but neither is 
it only something “positive." The distinction between the positive and 
the negative does not suffice to grasp what is essential, to which the 
non-essence belongs. The essence of the false is not something "false." 

To tpevSoq —we usually translate “the false"—is, for Greek thought, 
“dissembling." Dissembling lets something it sets out and sets up appear 
differently than it is “in truth." In the “different than" resides the “not- 
such-as," which, experienced on the basis of “dis-hiding" and uncon¬ 
cealedness, brings about a concealment. Nevertheless, insofar as dissem¬ 
bling not only sets “something else" before—namely, before what is 
to be presented—but lets something appear otherwise than it is “in 
truth," dissembling also unveils and hence is a kind of disclosure. If 
ipevdoq were altogether without this basic feature of hiding and “dis- 
hiding," and hence without the feature of concealing, then ipevSoc; 
could never arise as the counter-essence to aXqdeia, unconcealedness. 
“The false," in the Greek sense, has the basic feature of concealment. 
To keep immutably in our sight the primordial Greek experience of 
tpevSoq. we need to clarify how the essence of the false is delimited 
beyond the Greek world and even beyond its historical time, though 
there too it is still understood in general in the shadow of the light 
of ancient Greece. 

The word “false" is an un-German word and derives from the Latin 
falsum, which, as participle, pertains lofallere. Of the same stem is our 
word “fell," to bring about a downfall, and the Greek o(paAAo) We 
translate this Greek word by “deceive," but we must not forget that 
“deception," understood in the Greek way, is determined by ifjevdoq, 
by dissembling and setting-before, by hiding. In Greek thought, the 
word o(paAAo), “I deceive," names a consequence of the essence of ipev- 
6o(;. In Latin thought, the word fallere as “to bring to a fall" denotes 
the ground of the essence of if/ev6oq. What is the basis for the priority 
of fallere in the Latin formation of the counter-essence to truth? It lies 
in this, that the basic comportment of the Romans toward beings in 
general is governed by the rule of the imperium. Imperium says im-parare, 
to establish, to make arrangements: prae-cipere, to occupy something 
in advance, and by this occupation to hold command over it, and so 
to have the occupied as terntory. Imperium is commandment, command. 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [65-67] 


45 


The Roman law, ius — iubeo, I command—is rooted in the same essential 
domain of the imperial, command, and obedience. Command is the 
ground of the essence of domination; which is why a clearer and more 
proper translation of imperium is "high command." To be superior is 
part and parcel of domination. And to be superior is only possible 
through constantly remaining in the higher position by way of a con¬ 
stant surmounting of others. Here we have the genuine actus of imperial 
action. In the essence of the constant surmounting there resides, as 
the valley amid the mountains, the holding down and the bringing 
to a fall. Mere "felling" in the sense of striking down is the coarsest 
way, but not the genuinely essential imperial way, of bringing to a fall. 
The great and most inner core of the essence of essential domination 
consists in this, that the dominated are not kept down, nor simply de¬ 
spised, but, rather, that they themselves are permitted, within the terri¬ 
tory of the command, to offer their services for the continuation of 
the domination. The bnnging to a fall aims at keeping the overthrown 
standing in a certain sense, though not standing high. Impenal bnnging 
to a fall, fallere, is therefore a going after and a going around that lets 
stand. For the Romans, the essence of deceiving, of leading into error, 
of dissembling, and thus of ipevdoc;, is determined by fallere, by felling. 
The erroneous becomes falsum. 

Supposing now that this distinction between the Greek ipevSoq and 
the Roman falsum originates in other domains and has another weight 
than the distinction in the style of Greek and Roman pots and pans 
and spear points, and supposing that here a transformation takes place 
in the essential ground of the historicity of all history, then we need 
to reflect more thoughtfully on this Roman transformation of Greece. 
That the Occident still today, and today more decisively than ever, thinks 
the Greek world in a Roman way, i.e., in a Latin, i.e., in a Christian 
way (as paganism), i.e , in the Romanic, modern-European, way, is 
an event touching the most inner center of our historical existence. 
The political, which as iioAizixov arose formerly out of the essence of 
the Greek noAiq, has come to be understood in the Roman way. Since 
the time of the Imperium, the Greek word "political" has meant some¬ 
thing Roman. What is Greek about it now is only its sound. 


c) The imperial in the form of the curial of the curia. The connec¬ 
tion between verum and "true." The un-German meaning of 
"true" through the Roman-Christian verum. Verum: the estab¬ 
lished right as counter-word to falsum. Verum and a-pertum; 
Aadov and its counterpart to oAqdeq. 

How then how do matters stand as regards the essence of the false, 
the Roman falsum? A closer consideration of the process by which the 
Romans took up Greek poetry, thought, speech, and artistic production 



46 


The Third Directive [ 67 - 68 ] 


shows that falsum, "bringing to a fall," has transformed ipevdoc;, "dis¬ 
sembling," in accord with its own spirit and in so doing has itself been 
changed and thereby dislodged. Such change is ever the most danger¬ 
ous, but also the most enduring, form of domination. Since then, the 
Occident has known of ipevdoq only in the form of falsum. For us, 
the opposite of the true is the false. But the Romans did not only lay 
the foundation for the priority of the false as the standard meaning 
of the essence of untruth in the Occident. In addition, the consolidation 
of this priority of the false over ifjevdoq and the stabilizing of this consol¬ 
idation is a Roman accomplishment. The operating force in this accom¬ 
plishment is no longer the imperium of the state but the imperium of 
the Church, the sacerdotium. The "impenal" here emerges in the form 
of the cunal of the curia of the Roman pope His domination is likewise 
grounded in command. The character of command here resides in the 
essence of ecclesiastical dogma. Therefore this dogma takes into account 
equally the "true" of the "orthodox believers" as well as the "false" 
of the "heretics" and the "unfaithful " The Spanish Inquisition is a form 
of the Roman curial imperium. By way of Roman civilization, both the 
imperial/civil and the impenal/ecclesiastical, the Greek ipevSoq became 
for us in the Occident the "false." Correspondingly, the true assumed 
the character of the not-false. The essential realm of the imperial fallere 
determines the not-false as well as the falsum. The not-false, said in 
Roman fashion, is the verum. 

On our path of a preparatory clarification of the essence of aAqdeia, 
and hence of the Greek experience of the essence of truth, we have 
now elucidated the words dXqdeq, "unconcealing" or "disclosing," 
ipevdoq, "dissembling," falsum, "bringing to a fall," and thereby also 
the word "false" itself. Consequently, the main conditions have been 
fulfilled for us to learn how matters stand with the Latin word for 
ctAqdeq, i.e., verum, and how, above all, matters stand with our word 
for dAqdeia, "truth," and with the word "true." Since "true" is the 
counter-word to "false," the latter stemming from the Latin falsum, 
verum as the Latin counter-word io falsum must surely belong together 
with falsum in the same essential domain and hence must also draw 
the "true" into this domain. Here, of course, we are presupposing that 
"true" and verum belong together This holds insofar as our German 
word for "true" ["wahr"\ was early on determined by the Latin- 
Christian verum. That process has its own depth and its great bearing, 
precisely because veritas and verum, in the preaching of Christianity, 
did not present themselves to the Germans as arbitrary Latin words 
For Christian faith is proclaimed, in its totality, as "the" veritas, "the" 
verum, "the true," since Chnst says of himself- eyd) eipii q 66dq xai 
q dAqdeia xai q fcjq (John 14, 6). 

Only the sound of this phrase is Greek. That is why it could pass 
forthwith into the Latin language of the Vulgate: Ego sum via, et veritas. 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [68-70] 


47 


et vita. "I am the way and the truth and the life." Our words "truth" 
and "true" take their meaning from verum and veritas as these prevail 
in the Latin language of the Church. Whether, besides this, and prior 
to it, our German "true" had a root meaning proper to it, not deter¬ 
mined by verum and hence by falsum, is controversial, because it is 
obscure. It is obscure because nowhere does another essence of "true" 
and "truth" come to light within the historicity of German history. It 
would not be said as decisively of the word "true" what the brothers 
Gnmm say of "false": an un-German word. Nevertheless we must say 
it: "true" is an un-German word in view of the unequivocally clear 
fact that the basic meaning of "true" is determined by the Latin- 
Christian verum. 

But what does the Latin verum mean? The stem ver is Indo-Germanic, 
as is the siem fall of orpctAAcj, fallere, "fall." The stem ver appears un¬ 
equivocally in our German word wehren ["to resist"], die Wehr ["de¬ 
fense"], das Wehr ["dam"]; therein lies the moment of the "against," 
"resistance": "the resistant"—the dam against . . . Italic-Oscic veru, the 
gate—which shuts off passage and entrance— verostabulum — vesti- 
bulum —vestibule, the space before the properly separating entrance, 
which stands ver, against, it, (stabulum), the space in front of the door. 
But the standing-against is not the only moment in the ver. For in that 
case the word Ab-wehr ["resistance," literally, "defense-from"] would 
be a mere tautology; Wehr ["defense"] is not already in itself and only 
defense-against. In "Parcifal," ver does not mean resistance; instead, 
it means to defend oneself, maintain oneself: resistance-for. Thus ver 
means to keep one's position, hold one's place. To be sure, resistance 
always belongs here in a certain sense, yet this resistance is one that 
has to derive from a steadfastness. Ver means to be steady, to keep 
steady, i.e., not to fall (no falsum), to remain above, to maintain oneself, 
to keep one's head up, to be the head, to command. Maintaining one¬ 
self, standing upright—the upright Thus it is from the essential domain 
of the imperial that verum, as counter-word to falsum, received the sense 
of established right. Thereby from the original word ver a meaning has 
been extracted that clearly comes to the fore in the old Latin veru in 
the sense of gate and door, but also in the German das Wehr ["dam"], 
the gate that shuts and locks, the dam that seals off. The original element 
in ver and verum is that of closing off, covering, concealing, and shelter¬ 
ing, but it is not die Wehr ["defense"] as resistance. The corresponding 
Greek word of this Indo-Germanic stem is epvpa —the defensive 
weapon, the covering, the enclosure. Epvpa —to which the Roman 
word verum is immediately connected—means in Greek, however, pre¬ 
cisely the opposite of the Greek word for "true," i.e., it is the opposite 
of dAqdfia. Verum, epvpa —the enclosure, the covering; dAqdna —the 
dis-covering, the dis-closing. But how else could an opposition hold 
sway here unless they both shared, though in a concealed way, the 



48 The Third Directive /70-7/y 

same essential dimension? The Roman word for "the true," ver, has 
the root meaning of closing-covering and locking up, a meaning which 
was, to be sure, obliterated, or at least never expressly and purely liber¬ 
ated. The opposite to ver, verum, as the enclosing, is the non-enclosing. 
This "opposes" the verum. "Opposing," acting against, is expressed in 
Latin by the prefix op-', to be "against" the enclosing, against the ver, 
is op-verio or ap-verio, whence the Latin aperio: "I open." The main sense 
of opening, understood in the Roman way, is "non-enclosing." In the 
Latin word aperire, "to open," the original verum speaks According to 
the verbal structure, the participle of aperio, apertum, the un-enclosed, 
corresponds to the Greek aXqdeq. the unconcealed. The pertum canceled 
in a-pertum is the verum. This corresponds to the Greek \ad6v (\adeq). 
The original ver-, verum, means the same as the Greek Xaddv, hence 
precisely the opposite of dAqdet; The Roman verum, strictly speaking, 
should then be taken as equivalent to the Greek tpevSoq, if the latter 
is indeed the counter-word to dAqdet;. But the Roman verum not only 
does not coincide with ipevdoc;, it is precisely the opposite of ipevdoq 
as understood in Latin, \.e.,falsum. If we reflect on this, then mysterious 
ways of language and of the word show themselves in the realm where 
the essential possibility of the word itself, i.e., the essential possibility 
of the truth of its essence, is decided. With regard to the Latin name 
for the true, verum, we shall keep two incidents in mind: 

1. Verum, ver-, meant originally enclosing, covering. The Latin verum 
belongs to the same realm of meaning as the Greek ctAqdeq, the 
uncovered—precisely by signifying the exact opposite of ctAqdeq: the 
closed off. 

2. But now because verum is counter to falsum, and because the essen¬ 
tial domain of the imperium is decisive for verum and falsum and their 
opposites, the sense of ver-, namely enclosure and cover, becomes basi¬ 
cally that of covering for security against. Ver is now the maintaining- 
oneself, the being-above; ver becomes the opposite of falling.' Verum 
is the remaimng constant, the upright, that which is directed to what 
is superior because it is directing from above. Verum is rectum (regere, 
"the regime"), the right, iustum. For the Romans, the realm of conceal¬ 
ment and disconcealment does not at all come to be, although it strives 
in that direction in ver, the essential realm determining the essence 
of truth. Under the influence of the imperial, verum becomes forthwith 
"being-above," directive for what is right; veritas is then rectitude, "cor¬ 
rectness," we would say. This originally Roman stamp given to the es¬ 
sence of truth, which solidly establishes the all-pervading basic charac- 


1 Reading Fallen for Nkht-fallen —TV 




§3 Clarification of the transformation 171-73] 


49 


ter of the essence of truth in the Occident, rejoins an unfolding of the 
essence of truth that began already with the Greeks and that at the 
same time marks the inception of Western metaphysics. 


d) The transformation of the essence of ctAtjdeia since Plato. The 
assumption of the “representation" of aAqdeia through d/roiwoi^ 
(as rectitude of ratio) into veritas. Rectitude (iustitia) of ecclesiasti¬ 
cal dogmatics and the iustificatio of evangelical theology. The 
certum and the usus rectus (Descartes). Reference to Kant. The 
closing of the ring of the history of the essence of truth in the 
transformation of veritas into "justice" (Nietzsche). The incarcera¬ 
tion of dAqdeia in the Roman bastion of veritas, rectitude, and 

iustitia. 

Since Plato, and above all by means of Aristotle's thinking, a transfor¬ 
mation was accomplished within the Greek essence of ctAqdna, one 
which in a certain respect ciAqdna itself encouraged ’AAqdei; is first 
of all the unconcealed and the disclosing. The unconcealed as such 
can be disclosed for humans and by humans only if their disclosing 
comportment adheres to the unconcealed and is in agreement with it. 
Aristotle uses the word dAqdevav for this comportment, to adhere to 
the unconcealed disclosively in the saying that lets appear. This adher¬ 
ence to and agreement with the unconcealed is in Greek d/ioi'woic—the 
disclosive correspondence expressing the unconcealed. This correspon¬ 
dence takes and holds the unconcealed for what it is. To take something 
for something is in Greek oieodai. The ddyoc, which now means asser¬ 
tion, is constituted by the oieodai This disclosive correspondence still 
adheres to, and is wholly achieved within, the essential space of dAij- 
deia as unconcealedness.' At the same time, however, the d/ioi'wai^, 
i.e., the agreeing correspondence, as the mode of the execution of 
dAqdeveiv, assumes, as it were, the definitive "representation" of dAq- 
deia. This is, as the non-dissembling of beings, the assimilation of the 
disclosive saying to the disclosed self-showing beings, i.e., it is ofioicjoK; 
From then on, dAijdaa presents itself only in this essential form and 
is taken only in that way. 

Veritas as rectitude, stemming from another origin, is now, however, 
in a sense created to assume into itself the essence of dAqdeia in the 
henceforth “representative" form of dfioicjou;. The rightness of an asser¬ 
tion is its adjusting itself to a right rightly instituted and firmly estab¬ 
lished [Die Richtigkeit der Aussage ist ein Sichrichten nach dent Errichteten, 
Feststehenden. Rechten] The Greek dfioi'teoic: as disclosive correspon¬ 
dence and the Latin rectitude as adjustment to . . both have the charac- 


I On o/)iSo<, and stc bcUiw. p 81 




50 


The Third Directive [ 73 - 74 ] 


ter of an assimilation of assertions and thinking to the state of affairs 
present at hand and firmly established. Assimilation is called adaequatio. 
In the early Middle Ages, following the path set by the Romans, aXq- 
deia, presented as opoiooK;, became adaequatio. Veritas est adaequatio 
intellectus ad rent. The entire thinking of the Occident from Plato to Nie¬ 
tzsche thinks in terms of this delimitation of the essence of truth as 
correctness. This delimitation of the essence of truth is the metaphysical 
concept of truth-, more precisely, metaphysics receives its essence from 
the essence of truth thus determined. But because the Greek optoicjcnq 
turned into rectitudo, the realm of dAqdeia, disclosure, still present for 
Plato and Aristotle in optomoiq, disappeared. In rectitudo, in the "self¬ 
adjustment to . . . ," there also resides what the Greeks call oi'eodai, 
to take something as something and to accept it thus. But whereas 
for the Greeks to "take something as something" was still experienced 
within the essential realm of disclosedness and unconcealedness, 
thought in the Roman way it lies outside this essential domain. To "take 
something as something" is in Latin reor —the corresponding noun is 
ratio. In a variation of the Roman saying: res ad triarios venit,' we can 
say: res ciAqdnaq ad rationem venit.^ The essence of truth as veritas and 
rectitudo passes over into the ratio of man. The Greek dAqdeveiv, to 
disclose the unconcealed, which in Aristotle still permeates the essence 
of rex^rj, is transformed into the calculating self-adjustment of ratio. 
This determines for the future, as a consequence of a new transforma¬ 
tion of the essence of truth, the technological character of modern, i.e., 
machine, technology. And that has its origin in the originating realm 
out of which the imperial emerges. The impenal springs forth from 
the essence of truth as correctness in the sense of the directive self- 
adjusting guarantee of the security of domination. The "taking as true" 
of ratio, of reor, becomes a far-reaching and anticipatory security. Ratio 
becomes counting, calculating, calculus. Ratio is a self-adjustment to 
what is correct. 

Ratio is a facultas animi, a power of the human mind, the actus of 
which inhabits the inner man. The res, the thing, lies apart from ratio. 
In rectitudo as adaequatio, ratio is supposed to assimilate the thing. Now 
what is completely lacking here is the essential space of dAqdeia, the 
unconcealedness of things and the disclosing comportment of man, a 
space completely covered over by debris and forgotten. The essence 
of truth as veritas and rectitudo is without space and without ground. 
Veritas as rectitudo is a quality of the mind or soul in the inner man. 
A question was thus bound to arise as regards truth, how is it at all 


1 The manor has come lo ihc final siagc—TV 

2 A.\qdnci has aime lo reason—TV 




§3 Clarification of the transformation [74-76] 51 

possible for an inner process of the mind or soul to be brought into 
agreement with the things out there? And so begin the various attempts 
to explain it, all within an unclarified sphere. 

If we consider that for a long time the essence of man has been experi¬ 
enced as animal rationale, i.e., as the thinking animal, then it follows 
that ratio is not just one power among others but is the basic power 
of man. That to which man is empowered by this power is decisive 
with regard to his relation to the verum and falsum. In order to obtain 
the true as what is nght and correct, man must be assured and be 
certain of the correct use of his basic power. The essence of truth is 
determined on the basis of this assurance and certitude. The true be¬ 
comes the assured and certain. The verum becomes the certum. The ques¬ 
tion of truth becomes the question of whether and how man can be 
certain and assured about the being he himself is as well as about the 
beings he himself is not. 

The Roman world in the form of the ecclesiastical dogmatics of the 
Chnstian faith has contnbuted essentially to the consolidation of the 
essence of truth in the sense of rectitudo. The same realm of Christian 
faith introduces and prepares the new transformation of the essence 
of truth, the one of verum into certum Luther raises the question of 
whether and how man can be certain and assured of eternal salvation, 
i.e., certain of "the truth." Luther asks how man could be a "true" 
Christian, i.e., a just man, a man fit for what is just, a justified man. 
The question of the Christian veritas becomes, in the sense just articu¬ 
lated, the question of iustitia and iustificatio. As a concept of medieval 
theology, iustitia is rectitudo rationis et voluntatis —correctness of reason 
and will. Rectitudo appetitus rationalis, the correctness of the will, the 
striving for correctness, is the basic form of the will in its willing. 
Iustificatio is already, according to medieval doctrine, the primus motus 
fidei —the basic stirring of the disposition of faith.' The doctrine of justifi¬ 
cation, and indeed as the question of certainty of salvation, becomes 
the center of evangelical theology. The essence of truth in the modern 
penod is determined on the basis of certainty, correctness, being just, 
justice. 

The inception of the metaphysics of the modern age rests on the 
transformation of the essence of veritas into certitudo. The question of 

I Sancii Thomac Aquinaiis Opera Omnia. VI, Commentum in Quatuor Libras Sententia- 
rum. Volumen Primum. Distina U, Quaest I. Art V Expositio lexlus Justitia hie sumitur 
pro justitia generali. quae est reaitudo animae in comparatione ad Deum et ad proximum et 
unius potentiae ad aliam. et dicitur justitia fidei. quia in justificatione primus motus est fidei 
. . [Exposiiion of (he icxi hero jusiicc is lakcn as general jusiice, which is ihe correemess 
of (he soul in companson wiih God and neighbor, and of one power of (he soul with 
the other, and it is called justice of faith because in justification occurs the first motion 
of faith —TV 1 




52 


The Third Directive [ 76 - 77 ] 


truth becomes the question of the secure, assured, and self-assuring 
use of ratio. Descartes, the first thinker of modern metaphysics, inquires 
into the usus rectus rationis, i.e., facultatis iudicandi, the correct use of 
reason, i.e., of the faculty of judgment. The essence of saying and assert¬ 
ing had already for a long time not been the Greek Adyoc;, i.e., 
anocpai'veodoi, the letting appear of the unconcealed. The essence of 
saying is now the Roman iudicium —correct saying, i.e., attaining, with 
certainty, what is right. Therefore the fundamental book of modern 
metaphysics, Descartes's Meditationes de prima philosophia, includes 
within its reflections on metaphysics the meditatio quarta, which treats 
de vero et falso. Now, where all that matters is the usus rectus rationis 
humanae, falsity is conceived as usus non rectus facultatis iudicandi. The 
usus non rectus is error, fault; or better: erring and error are conceived 
on the basis of the usus non rectus facultatis iudicandi. The untrue is the 
false in the sense of the erroneous, i.e., in the sense of the wrong use 
of reason. 

In the second principal book of modern metaphysics, Kant's Critique 
of Pure Reason, the usus, the use of reason, is in question everywhere. 
"Critique of pure reason" means essential delimitation of the correct 
and incorrect use of the human faculty of reason. The question of the 
"correct use" treats of the will to secure the certainty which man, on 
his own, standing amidst beings, must attain and wishes to attain. Veri¬ 
tas in the Christian understanding, i.e., rectitudo animae, iustitia, provides 
to the modern essence of truth its character as the certainty and assur¬ 
ance of the content of human comportment. The true, verum, is what 
is nght, what vouches for certainty, and in that sense it is the righteous, 
the just. 

If we experience and come to know these nexuses historically, as 
our history, i.e., as modern European "world"-history, will it then sur¬ 
prise us that in Nietzsche's thought, where the metaphysics of the Occi¬ 
dent reaches its peak, the essence of truth is founded on certitude and 
"justice"? Even for Nietzsche the true is the right, that which is directed 
by what is real in order to adjust itself to it and make itself secure 
in it. The basic feature of reality is will to power. What is right must 
conform itself to the real, hence must express what the real says, namely 
the "will to power." All correctness must be adjusted in terms of the 
will to power Correspondence to what the will to power utters is the 
just, i.e., justice. It receives its essence, at the end of Western metaphys¬ 
ics, from the decree of the will to power. Nietzsche very often uses 
the word "life" as a title for the "will to power," and he uses it in 
accord with the usual "biological" way of thinking of the second half 
of the nineteenth century. Nietzsche can therefore say: "Justice is the 
highest representative of life itself." This is a Christian thought, though 
in the mode of the antichrist. Everything "anti" thinks in the spirit 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [77-79] 


53 


of that against which it is "anti." Justice, in Nietzsche's sense, presents 
the will to power. 

TVuth is, in the West, veritas. The true is that which, on various 
grounds, is self-asserting, remains above, and comes from above; i.e., 
it is the command. But the "above," the "highest," and the "lord" of 
lordship may appear in different forms. For Chnstianity, "the Lord" 
is God. "The lord" is also "reason." "The lord" is the "world-spirit." 
"The lord" is "the will to power." And the will to power, as expressly 
determined by Nietzsche, is in essence command. In the age in which 
the modern period finds its completion in a historical total state of the 
globe, the Roman essence of truth, veritas, appears as rectitudo and 
iustitia, as "justice." This is the fundamental form of the will to power. 
The essence of what is "just," assigned this essence of justice, is deter¬ 
mined by Nietzsche unequivocally in the following note from the Sum¬ 
mer of 1883, made on the occasion of his reading of a new book by 
Schneider, Der thierische Wide [Animal will]: "What is just = the will, 
to perpetuate an actual power relation . ."' 

The Roman veritas has become the "justice" of the will to power. 
The circle of the history of the essence of truth, as metaphysically experi¬ 
enced, is now closed. Yet dAqdeia remains outside this circle. The prov¬ 
ince of its essence is practically obliterated within the region of the 
domination of Western veritas. 

It seems as if dAqdeia has withdrawn itself from the history of Occi¬ 
dental humanity. It seems as if the Roman veritas, and the truth which 
evolves out of it as rectitudo and iustitia, correctness and justice, have 
commandeered the field of the essence of dAqdeia. Not only does it 
seem so, it is so The field of the essence of dAqdeia is covered over 
with debris. But if that were all, then it would be an easy task to clear 
the debris and once again lay open this field. The difficulty is that it 
is not merely covered over with debris; there has been built on it an 
enormous bastion of the essence of truth determined in a manifold 
sense as "Roman." To the "Roman" there belongs also the "Romanic," 
as well as everything essentially modern determined from it, which 
in the meantime has expanded into world history and is no longer 
limited to the European. (The connection visible here between rexvq 
as a way of dAqdeveiv and modern mechanical technique cannot now 
be exposed in more detail.) 

Moreover, the bastion reinforcing the essence of truth as veritas, 
rectitudo, and iustitia has not only thrust itself in front of dAqdeia, 
but in the walls of this bastion dAqdeia itself is immured, after first 
being reinterpreted to serve as one of the building stones, hewn 
expressly for it. This is the reason dAqdeia has been understood 


I WW (Grossokiav), XIII, n 462, p 205 




54 


The Third Directive [ 79-801 


ever since on the basis of veritas and rectitudo and only on that basis. 

How then can we still experience aAqdeia itself in its primordial es¬ 
sence? And if this is denied us, how are we to see, within the confines 
of the domination of veritas and rectitudo, that this domain of veritas 
itself nevertheless is founded in the region of essence of aAqdeia and 
constantly appeals to it, though without, to be sure, knowing it or being 
mindful of it? How, within the confines of the domination of veritas 
and rectitudo, can we know, or even just seek to know, that veritas and 
rectitudo and iustitia cannot de facto exhaust the primordial essence of 
truth and in principle can never exhaust it, since they are what they 
are only in the wake of dAqdeia? Western metaphysics may elevate 
the true up to the absolute spirit of Hegel's metaphysics and may claim 
"the angels" and "the saints" for "the true," yet the essence of truth 
has already long since retreated from its beginning, i.e., from the ground 
of its essence. It fell out from its beginning and hence is a falling away, 
an apostasy. 


Recapitulation 


3) The sending [das Geschicht] of the assignment of Being: retro¬ 
spective consideration of the history of the transformation of the 
essence of truth. The "balances" of history (Burckhardt, Nietzsche, 

Spengler). The historical "conferral of meaning" in the modern 

period. 

To grasp anything at all of the self-contained essence of the pnmordial 
Greek aAqdeia, we who live so much later need to have in sight that 
against which aAqdeia sets itself off for us. Therefore a sketch of the 
history of the transformation of the essence of truth is unavoidable. 
This will not be a historiographical treatment of the history of the con¬ 
cept of truth, nor will it examine how people have apprehended truth 
in the course of the centuries, for this apprehension itself already 
rests, in its correctness and incorrectness, on the holding sway of an 
essence of truth. Our aim is the history of the essence itself, of truth 
itself. 

In this appeal to history, there is guiding, if you will, a conception 
of the essence of history. It would be fatal if it were not so. And it 
would be still more fatal if it were completely unclear to us. It is no 
less certain that it is difficult to allude to this history and that the presen¬ 
tation of it will be exposed to manifold gross misinterpretations from 
all directions. 

"History," conceived essentially, that is, thought in terms of the 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [80-821 


55 


ground of the essence of Being itself, is the transformation of the essence 
of truth. It is "only" this. Here the "only" does not indicate a restriction 
but refers to the uniqueness of the primordial essence, from which as 
ground the other essential features of history spring forth as essential 
consequences. History "is" the transformation of the essence of truth. 
Historical beings receive their Being from such transformation. Amid 
these transformations of the essence of truth occur the inconspicuous 
rare moments when history pauses. These pausing moments of hidden 
repose are the primordial historical moments, for in them the essence 
of truth originally assigns itself, and transmits itself, to beings. 

For a long time it has been maintained that where there are events, 
motion, and processes, where something "comes to pass," there we 
have history, for history has to do with what "happens," and "happen¬ 
ing" means "coming to pass." But happening and history actually mean 
destiny, destining, assignment. Genuinely formulated in German, we 
may not speak of history ["die" Geschichte], in the sense of coming to 
pass, but of sending ["das Geschicht"], in the sense of the assignment 
of Being. Luther still uses this genuinely German word [das Geschicht], 
The question remains as to what for man is the essentially send-able 
or trans-mittable [Zu-schickbare] and the self-transmitting. If the essence 
of man is founded in the fact that he is that being to whom Being 
itself reveals itself, then the essential trans-mittal and the essence of 
"sending" is the unveiling of Being. But if unveiling is the essence of 
truth, and if in accordance with the transformation of this essence of 
truth the assignment of Being is also transform^ed, then the essence 
of "history" is the transformation of the essence of truth. 

In the concealed repose of this transformation, there rests and sways, 
holds and fluctuates, congeals and whirls, that which is established on 
the basis of "historiography," i.e., on the basis of the investigations and 
explorations of objectivized "history," as events and accomplishments, 
i.e., as data [Sachen] and deeds [Taten], or in short, as facts [Tat-sachen], 
These constatations then are presented with the prodigious display of 
the technical gadgets of modern research, making it seem that the tech¬ 
nique of historiography is history itself. The historiographical thus be¬ 
comes identified with the histoncal. From this "historiographical" ele¬ 
ment, "balances" are made up, "taxations" are drawn, and "shares" 
and "costs" are calculated, which "man" in history must pay. It is cer¬ 
tainly no accident that a thinker of history of the rank of Jacob Burck- 
hardt, and precisely he, moves within the horizon of "balances," "taxa¬ 
tions," "shares," and "costs," and gives an account of history according 
to the schema of "culture and barbarism." Even Nietzsche thinks in 
terms of this schema of the nineteenth century. Nietzsche turns the 
"calculating of values," i.e., the accounting, into the final form of West¬ 
ern metaphysical thinking. 



56 


The Third Directive [ 82 — 83 ] 


Exclusively on the basis of Nietzsche's metaphysics and without any 
original metaphysical thought, at the start of the twentieth century the 
author O. Spengler drew up a "balance" of Western history and pro¬ 
claimed "The decline of the Occident." Today, as in 1918, when the 
arrogant book of this title came out, an eager public snaps up only 
the outcome of the "balance" without ever considering on which basic 
ideas of history this cheap balance of decline is concocted. In fact it 
had already been reckoned up clearly by Nietzsche, though thought 
out in a different way and in other dimensions. To be sure, the guild 
of serious researchers computed the "errors" of the book. This had the 
remarkable result that since then historiography itself has been con¬ 
ducted more and more within the horizon of Spengler's views and sche¬ 
mata, even where it was naturally able to make "more correct" and 
"more exact" constatations. Only to an age which had already forsaken 
every possibility of thoughtful reflection could an author present such 
a book, in the execution of which a brilliant acumen, an enormous 
erudition, and a strong gift for categorization are matched by an unusual 
pretension of judgment, a rare superficiality of thinking, and a pervasive 
frailty of foundations. This confusing semi-scholarship and carelessness 
of thinking has been accompanied by the peculiar state of affairs that 
the same people who decry the priority of the biological thinking in 
Nietzsche's metaphysics find contentment in the aspects of decline in 
the Spenglerian vision, which is based throughout on nothing but a 
crude biological interpretation of history. 

Modern views of history, since the nineteenth century, like to speak 
about "meaning-conferral." This term suggests that man, on his own, 
is capable of "lending" a "meaning" to history, as if man had something 
to lend out at all, and as if history needed such a loan, all of which 
indeed presupposes that history "in itself" and at first is meaningless 
and in every case has to wait for the favor of a meaning bestowed 
by man. But what man is capable of in relation to history is to pay 
heed to it and to take care that history does not conceal from him 
its meaning and refuse it to him. But, as the case of Spengler shows, 
man has already lost the meaning of history when he has deprived 
himself of the very possibility of thinking about what, in the hasti¬ 
ness of drawing up "historiographical" balances, he is investing in the 
word "meaning." "Meaning" is the truth in which a being as such rests. 
The "meaning" of history, however, is the essence of truth, in which 
at any time the truth of a human epoch is founded. We experience the 
essence of the tiue only on the basis of the essence of truth, which 
in each case lets something true be the true that it is. We shall 
attempt here and now to take some steps in reflecting on the essence 
of truth. 



§3 Clarification of the transformation [84-851 


57 


4) The event of the conversion of the essence of untruth from the 
Greek ipevSot; to the Roman falsum. The fulfillment of the trans¬ 
formation of veritas into certitudo in the nineteenth century. The 
self-assurance of self-certainty (Nietzsche, Fichte, Hegel). 

We have sketched the transformation of the essence of truth in Western 
history in a few strokes. The basic meanings of the opposites aAqdeq- 
ifjEvdoq, falsum-verum, true-false, incorrect-correct, should now be 
brought closer for reflection. 

In the transformation of the essence of truth from dAqdeia, by way 
of the Roman veritas, to the medieval adaequatio, rectitude, and iustitia, 
and from there to the modern certitudo, to truth as certainty, validity, 
and assurance, the essence and the character of the opposition between 
truth and untruth are also altered. The self-evident view that falsity 
is the only opposite to truth is thereby formed and reinforced. The result 
of this transformation of the essence of truth, which has prevailed for 
centuries in the Occident, is the event of the conversion of the essence 
of untruth from the Greek qjevdoqio the Roman falsum. This conversion 
is the presupposition for the modern characterization of the essence 
of falsity. That becomes error, error in the sense of the incorrect use 
of the human power of affirmation and denial. The correct use of the 
power of judgment is determined in reference to what assures man's 
self-certainty. The intention toward certainty now determines for its 
part the direction, the kind of sight, and the selection of what is repre¬ 
sented as that to which the judgments of affirmation and denial are 
imparted. 

The essence of veritas in the form of certitudo unfolds in the direction 
of the certainty of the content of "life " The certainty of life, i.e., its 
constant "advantage," rests, according to Nietzsche, upon correctness, 
that is, upon the essential certainty of the "will to power." This is the 
reality, i.e., the essence, of everything "real" and not merely of man. 
Correctness as the essence of the will to power, i.e., assurance and cer¬ 
tainty as its essence, is called "justice" by Nietzsche. He is thinking 
here, although unwittingly, in the sense of the Western tradition of veri¬ 
tas as iustitia. In a note' from the year 1885 he writes: "Justice, as the 
function of a wide-ranging power looking beyond the small perspectives 
of good and evil, hence has a broader horizon of advantage —the inten¬ 
tion to obtain something that is more than this or that person." ("More," 
i.e., "has more value.") 

From this it is clear that the power for which those perspectives, 
ones marking the distinction between "good and evil," are "small" per- 


1. Ibid , XIV, n 158, p 80 



58 


The Third Directive [ 85 — 86 ] 


spectives moves within the broader (and only for it appropriate) horizon 
determined by Nietzsche as the horizon of "advantage." But advantage 
is made secure only by taking advantage That allocates everything to 
the self-assurance of power. Power can only be assured by the constant 
enhancement of power. Nietzsche recognized this very clearly and de¬ 
clared that within the realm of essence of the will to power the mere 
preservation of an already attained level of power already represents 
a decrease in the degree of power. In the essence of assurance there 
resides a constant back-relatedness to itself, and in this lies the required 
self-elevation. The self-assurance as self-certainty, in this constant back- 
relatedness, must become absolute. The fundamental outline of the met¬ 
aphysical essence of reality as truth, and of this truth as absolute cer¬ 
tainty, is prepared by Fichte and appears for the first time in Hegel's 
metaphysics of the absolute spirit. Here truth becomes the absolute self¬ 
certainty of absolute reason In Hegel's metaphysics and in Nietzsche's, 
i.e., in the nineteenth century, the transformation of veritas into certitudo 
is completed. This completion of the Roman essence of truth is the 
proper and hidden histoncal meaning of the nineteenth century. 


§4. The multiplicity of the oppositions to unconcealedness in its 
essential character. 


a) The rich essence of concealedness. Modes of concealing: dnarq, 
(pedoSoc;),xevdo), xpvmcj, xaAvmo). Homer, Iliad, XX, 118; Odys¬ 
sey, VI, 303; III, 16; Iliad, XXlll, 244. The disclosive power of 
muthos and the question of the Greek divinities. 

But veritas and rectitude do not at all fulfill the essence of dAqdeia. 
Therefore it also holds that the essence of untruth is not necessarily 
falsitas, falsity. And even if we go back to the more primal essence of 
untruth, ipevSoq, which, as hiddenness, precisely indicates the basic 
character of concealment and in that way presents the genuine counter¬ 
essence to unconcealedness, still the question remains open whether 
this counter-essence, ipevdoq. exhausts all possible opposition to truth. 
In the course of our considerations, we saw in fact that the Greeks, 
in addition to ipevdoq. also knew of ocpdAAeiv. "to mislead." But this 
way of hiddenness, so-called "deception," is, precisely as a mode of 
hiding, already founded on the latter and is not a distinctive type of 
counter-essence to unconcealedness. This also holds for one way of 
hiddenness which for the Greeks was still more common and which 
they denoted with the word dndiq. We translate again as "deception." 
Literally and concretely this word says: "ab (from) ndrex;," i.e., from 



§4 Multiplicity of the oppositions [87-88] 


59 


the right way and path. The ordinary Greek word for “way" is i) dSo^ 
from which derives t) iiedodoq, our borrowed word “method." But q 
liedoBoq does not mean for the Greeks “method" in the sense of a 
procedure with the aid of which man undertakes an assault on objects 
with his investigations and research. ‘H iiedodoq is to-be-on-the-way, 
namely on a way not thought of as a “method" man devises but a 
way that already exists, arising from the very things themselves, as they 
show themselves through and through. The Greek t) iiedodoq does not 
refer to the “procedure" of an inquiry but rather is this inquiry itself 
as a remaining-on-the-way. In order to discern this essence of “method" 
understood in the Greek manner, we must first recognize that the Greek 
concept of “way," 666q, includes an element of per-spect and pro-spect. 
“Way" is not “stretch" in the sense of the remoteness or distance be¬ 
tween two points and so itself a multiplicity of points. The perspective 
and prospective essence of the way, which itself leads to the uncon¬ 
cealed, i.e., the essence of the course, is determined on the basis of 
unconcealedness and on the basis of a going straightaway toward the 
unconcealed. 'A-naiq is detour, by-way, and off-way, making available 
another prospect and supporting it in such a marmer that, as way, it 
might indeed be the one going “straightaway" toward the unconcealed. 
The by-way and the off-way let us encounter what is not shown amid 
the appearances on the right way. But insofar as the off-way does show 
something, it exchanges what it shows for what is properly to be shown 
by the way leading straightaway on. Through this exchange [Vertau- 
schung] the off-way deceives [tduscht] as off-way, owing to which 
anaiq, deception, arises in the first place. 'Anaiqdqvai means to be 
led on a by-way and an off-way in such a fashion that the thing to 
be expenenced is dissembled. Andzq, too, is a manner of concealment, 
namely a kind of dissembling that conceals by distorting. Every hiding 
and dissembling is, to be sure, a concealing, but not every concealing 
is a hiding in the sense of dis.sembling and distorting. 

If, accordingly, unconcealedness might still be related to other ways 
of concealment, then there would result an essential relation which 
to our way of thinking would mean that falsity and dissembling (and 
consequently untruth understood in those terms) are not the only oppo¬ 
sites to truth at all, presupposing of course that we take the essence 
of truth as unconcealedness, i.e., disclosiveness. But were the Greeks 
themselves aware of other modes of concealment besides dissemblance 
{ipevSog)? Certainly. Their way of speech attests to it. We are familiar 
with their ordinary words xevdo), xpvmcj, xaAvmcj: to shelter, to con¬ 
ceal, to veil. Iliad, XXII, 118: B:oy “hides" rich treasures. Odyssey, IX, 
348: the boat of Odysseus has a “cache" of precious wine. Odyssey, 
VI, 303; house and court give “haven" to the entenng ^eivog. Such 
ways of sheltering and concealing belong to the sphere of everyday 



60 


The Third Directive [ 88 - 89 ] 


relations. They do not manifest the pre-eminent level of the essence 
of concealment. It is already more essential to say (Odyssey. III. 16) 
that the earth shelters the dead. The Iliad. XXIII. 244. speaks oC'AlSi 
xevdcjpai, of being ensconced in Hades. Here the earth itself and the 
subterranean come into relation with sheltering and concealing. The 
essential connection between death and concealment is starting to ap¬ 
pear. For the Greeks, death is not a "biological" process, any more than 
birth is. Birth and death take their essence from the realm of disclosive- 
ness and concealment. Even the earth receives its essence from this 
same realm. The earth is the in-between, namely between the conceal¬ 
ment of the subterranean and the luminosity, the disclosiveness. of the 
supraterranean (the span of heaven, ovpavoq). For the Romans, on 
the contrary, the earth, tellus, terra, is the dry. the land as distinct from 
the sea; this distinction differentiates that upon which construction, set¬ 
tlement, and installation are possible from those places where they are 
impossible. Terra becomes territorium, land of settlement as realm of 
command. In the Roman terra can be heard an imperial accent, com¬ 
pletely foreign to the Greek yaia and y/ 7 . 

The Greek words xpvmeiv and xpvmeodai (whence crypta and 
crypt) mean sheltering concealment Kpvmeiv applies above all to vuf, 
the night. Similarly, day and night in general manifest the events of 
disclosure and concealment. Since to the Greeks everything that is 
arises, most basically, out of the essence of concealment and uncon¬ 
cealedness, they therefore speak of and ovpavdq, the night and 
the light of day, when they want to express the beginning of all that 
is. What is said in that way is what is primordially to be said. It is 
authentic legend, the primordial word. Mvdoc; is the Greek for the word 
that expresses what is to be said before all else. The essence of pvdoq 
is thus determined on the basis of aAqdeia. It is pvdot; that reveals, 
discloses, and lets be seen; specifically, it lets be seen what shows itself 
in advance and in everything as that which presences in all "presence." 
Only where the essence of the word is grounded in aAqdeia, hence 
among the Greeks, only where the word so grounded as pre-eminent 
legend pervades all poetry and thinking, hence among the Greeks, and 
only where poetry and thinking are the ground of the primordial rela¬ 
tion to the concealed, hence among the Greeks, only there do we find 
what bears the Greek name pvdoq, "myth." The proposition that there 
is only one myth, namely the pvdoc; of the Greeks, can hardly be ex¬ 
pressed, because it expresses something far too self-evident, just as is 
the case with the proposition that there is only a fiery fire. But "myth" 
does of course have to do with the gods. "Mythology" is about "the 
gods." Certainly. But if we ask what is meant here by "gods," the answer 
is that it refers to the "Greek gods." Yet it is not sufficient to use the 
single God of Christianity as the measure and then point out that the 



§4 Multiplicity of the oppositions [89-911 


61 


Greeks practiced a polytheism, and indeed a polytheism of gods that 
are comparatively less "spiritual” and altogether of a lesser nature. As 
long as we make no attempt to think the Greek gods in the Greek 
way, i.e., on the basis of the essence of the Greek expenence of Being, 
i.e., on the basis of aAqdeia, we have no right to say a word about 
these gods, whether in favor of them or against them. 


b) The connection between pdflo^and the Greek deities. 

Earth, day, night, and death in relation to unconcealedness. The 
mysterious as one of the modes of concealment. Rejection 
of the negativity in falsity and in dissembling as the one 
and only counter-essence to the truth. 

Since, in these remarks on the "didactic poem" of Parmenides, we are 
seeking the essence of the goddess ’AAqdeia, sooner or later a time 
must come when we are forced to elucidate the connection between 
pvdoq and the Greek deities, for only these can be considered here. 
Mvdoq is legend, this word literally taken in the sense of essential pri¬ 
mordial speech. "Night" and "light" and "earth" are a pvdoq —not "im¬ 
ages" for concealing and unveiling, "images" which a pre-philosophical 
thinking does not transcend. Rather, concealment and unconcealedness 
are in advance experienced in such an essential way that just the simple 
change of night and day suffices to enhance the emergence of all essence 
into the preserving word, fivdo<;. The mere distinction between light 
and darkness, which we usually ascnbe to day and night, does not, 
taken for itself, say anything. Since the distinction as such says nothing 
about the essence of concealment and disclosure, it does not at all have 
the character of a pvdoc;. The distinction between light and darkness 
remains "unmythical" unless first of all clearness and concealment al¬ 
ready appear as the essence of the light and the dark and along with 
them that which comes into the light and recedes into the darkness 
appears in such a way that precisely this coming into the light and 
this receding into darkness make up the essence in which all presence 
and all absence dwell. Only if we pay heed to this will we have a 
measure for comprehending that the primordial thinker thinks Being 
itself on the basis of unconcealedness and concealment. And only if 
we have this measure can we assess the Greek words of concealing 
and sheltering in their essential relations to earth, death, light, and 
night. 

Of course, the bastion of the prevailing essence of truth, veritas and 
truth as correctness and certitude, is occluding the primordial under¬ 
standing of aAqdeia. This does not simply mean that culturally, in histo¬ 
riographical presentations of the Greek world, we no longer know and 
appreciate the early Greek "concept of truth," but it means something 



62 


The Third Directive [ 91—921 


else, essentially different, something momentous, and for our history 
the only decisive thing: the entirety of beings has in the meantime been 
transformed in such a way that beings as a whole, and therefore also 
man, are no longer determined on the basis of the essence of dAqdeia. 
Consequently, as soon as we hear of concealment and of modes of con¬ 
cealing, we think immediately, and only, of modes of human activity 
man himself controls. We do not experience concealment and disclosure 
as events which "come over" beings and man. If, however, for the 
Greeks the essence of concealment and unconcealedness was experi¬ 
enced so essentially as the basic feature of Being itself, must not conceal¬ 
ment itself then display a more pnmordial essence, for which conceal¬ 
ment in the form of ifjevSoc;, dissemblance, in no way suffices? 

Nevertheless, to a certain extent we can still recognize and under¬ 
stand different modes of concealment. In fact we must do so, if we 
wish to recapture an ability to glimpse the one mode of concealment 
that for the Greeks, over and beyond ifJEvSoq, has codetermined the 
truth, the unconcealedness and unhiddenness, of all beings. 

Ordinarily, concealing is for us displacing, a kind of putting "away" 
or putting aside. What is no longer beside us, i.e., nearby (in Greek: 
napd), is gone "away" (in Greek: ano). What is gone away has disap¬ 
peared, is absent; what is gone away is, in a certain marmer, no more, 
it is destroyed. Destruction, as putting aside, is a form of concealment. 

There is also, however, a kind of concealment that does not at all 
put aside and destroy the concealed but instead shelters and saves the 
concealed for what it is. This concealment does not deprive us of the 
thing, as in cases of dissembling and distorting, withdrawing and put¬ 
ting aside. This concealment preserves It is characteristic, e.g., of what 
we call, in a notable sense, the rare. Usually, i.e., for the mere eagerness 
to calculate and to snatch up, the rare is simply what is available only 
at times and even then only for a few. But what is truly rare is available 
precisely always and for everyone, except that it dwells in a conceal¬ 
ment harboring something utterly decisive and holding in readiness 
high claims on us. The proper relation to the rare is not to chase after 
it but to leave it at rest by acknowledging the concealment. 

Perhaps there are modes of concealment that not only preserve and 
put away and so in a certain sense still withdraw, but that rather, in 
a unique way, impart and bestow what is essential. The essential type 
of bestowal and bequest is in each case a concealment, and indeed 
not only of the bestower but of what is bestowed, insofar as the be¬ 
stowed does not simply surrender its treasures but only lets this come 
into unconcealment: namely that in it a richness is lodged which will 
be attained to the degree it is protected against abuse. The concealment 
holding sway here is close to the concealment characteristic of the se- 



§4 Multiplicity of the oppositions [92-94] 


63 


cret, which may have, though not by necessity, the basic character of 
mystery. The essence of the latter has been foreign to man from the 
moment he "explained" the mysterious simply as the unexplained. The 
mystery thus becomes a "residue" still remaining to be explained. But 
since technical explaining and explicability provide the criterion for 
what can claim to be real, the inexplicable residue left over becomes 
the superfluous. In this way the mysterious is only what is left over, 
what is not yet accounted for and incorporated within the circuit of 
explicative procedures. 

It would surely be simplistic and not thoughtful at all if we were 
saying that the little ego of some individual man were capable of elevat¬ 
ing calculability to the rank of the measure of the reality of the real. 
Instead, the modern age corresponds to the metaphysical depth of the 
course of its history, when, in accordance with its will toward the un¬ 
conditional "residuelessness" of all procedure and all organizing, it 
builds broad avenues through all continents and so no longer has a 
place free for that residue in which the mystery would still glimmer 
in the form of mere inexplicability. The secret in the mystery is a kind 
of concealment, characterized by its insignificance, in virtue of which 
the mystery is an open one. We readily misuse the term "open secret" 
or "open mystery" and apply it to the situation where there is precisely 
nothing secret or mystenous at all but where what is already known 
by everyone is not supposed to be brought into the open. The "open 
mystery" in the genuine and strict sense, on the contrary, occurs where 
the concealing of the mysterious is simply experienced as concealedness 
and is lodged in a historically arisen reticence. The openness of the 
open mystery does not consist in solving the mystery, thus destroying 
it, but consists in not touching the concealedness of the simple and 
essential and letting this concealedness alone in its appearance. The 
insignificance of the concealment proper to the genuine mystery is al¬ 
ready a result of the essence of the simple, which for its part is grounded 
pnmordially. 

Another kind of concealment within the mysterious is displayed by 
the clandestine, under the cover of which, e.g., a conspiracy simmers. 
There the concealment has the character of an extended yet at the same 
time tightly knit ambush, lying in wait for the moment of the sudden 
outburst. The inconspicuous is here, too. But now it takes the form 
of camouflage and deception. Therefore this inconspicuousness must 
explicitly protrude everywhere and must always be concerned with 
safeguarding its outward appearance 

Far away from these modes of concealment, and yet within the sphere 
of the same essence, resides the concealed in the sense of the merely 
not yet known. This concealment includes, e.g., the honzon of scientific 



64 


The Third Directive [94-951 


and technical discoveries. When the concealed in this sense is brought 
into unconcealedness, there arise “the miracles of technology" and what 
is specifically “Amencan." 

These comments on the essential character of concealment and con¬ 
cealedness, considered fully, come down to this: we are here only 
broaching a realm whose fullness of essence we hardly surmise and 
certainly do not fathom, for we are outside the mode of experience 
proper to it. It would therefore also be an error to claim that the rich 
essence of concealedness could be gained just by counting the sundry 
modes of concealment, under the guidance of the various "word mean¬ 
ings." If we speak of "kinds" of concealment we do not mean that 
there would be a genus, "concealment in general," to which then, fol¬ 
lowing the schema of the usual logical classification, various species 
and their sub-species and variations would be subordinated. The con¬ 
nection among the kinds of concealedness is a historical one, and the 
historical must be kept distinct from the "historiographical." The latter 
is information about and acquaintance with the historical, and indeed 
in a purely technical sense, i.e., it calculates by balancing the past 
against the present and vice versa. Everything historiographical takes 
direction from the historical. History, on the contrary, has no need of 
the historiographical. The historiographer is always just a technician, 
a journalist; the thinker of history is always quite distinct. Jacob Burck- 
hardt is not a historiographer but a true thinker of history. 

It has been our concern merely to show that unconcealedness does 
not have as its only "opposite" concealment in the sense of dissem¬ 
blance and falsity but that there are other modes of concealment of 
a completely different order, bearing no trace of the "negativity" of fal¬ 
sity and distortion. With these remarks, the mystery can perhaps be¬ 
come more open, the mystery that in the metaphysics of the Occident 
falsity could attain status and priority as the only opposite to truth. 
For the present task of an elucidation of the essence of dXqdeia, our 
reference to the "species" of concealedness may be useful in helping 
us grasp sooner that mode of concealment constantly present for the 
Greeks but not questioned by them as to its essence, with the exception 
that for the Greeks already the very word denoting this concealment 
and its domain contains enough of its own elucidation. 

Thus we come upon an astonishing thing: despite the fact that the 
modes of concealment having nothing in common with dissemblance, 
distortion, and deception pervade everything so essentially, yet they 
were not explicitly mentioned as modes of concealment. Perhaps it is 
only because they are so essential that they were not explicitly named. 
They appear therefore in each case already under the essential form 
of unconcealedness, which in a certain way retains within itself conceal- 



§4 Multiplicity of the oppositions [95-97] 


65 


edness and concealment and even must do so. When we see this con¬ 
nection we approach the miracle of the primordial essence of aAqdeia. 

We are not sufficiently prepared, however, to say more about it. The 
one thing we now have to consider is that the Greeks do speak of 
a concealment distinct from dissemblance and distortion and related 
to the concealment reticently uttered in pvdoq. The concealment now 
to be considered is expressed by the Greeks in their words Aavdaveodai, 
iniAavdaveadai. 


Recapitulation 


Supplementary clarification; the "way" of the arriving thinker in 
the "didactic poem." The connection between the essence of the 
goddess and the ways toward and from her home. By-way and 
off-way. The question of the other counter-essence to 
disclosedness. The essence of disclosure and concealment as 
expressed in word and legend. The loss of the word in its 
preservation of the relation of Being to man. The Roman 
transformation of to ^wov Adyov £jov into “animal" rationale. 
Reference to Kant, Nietzsche, Spengler. Mvdoq enoq Adyoq. 

In relation to the third directive given to us by the translation of aAqdeia 
as "unconcealedness," we are asking about the oppositional character 
of the opposition in which "truth" stands The previous lecture and 
today's, in their interconnection, accomplish an essential step, decisive 
not only for an insight into the essence of the opposition between truth 
and untruth, but decisive also for understanding Parmenides' didactic 
poem. Therefore the recapitulation of the last lecture must be clarified 
with some supplements and the immediate requirements of our project 
deferred. 

The opposite to "truth" is called, briefly and succinctly, "untruth." 
The word "untruth," and likewise the word "un-just," do not ordinarily 
mean for us simply a failure of justice or a lack of truth. Exactly as 
"in-justice" is counter to justice, against justice, so is "untruth" counter 
to truth. The Occident thinks this counter-essence to truth as falsity. 
In the sphere of this counter-essence to truth, variations of falsity 
emerge in the form of essential consequences of untruth, of its assertion 
and communication. Even for the Greeks themselves, manifold modes 
of dissembling and distorting belong to ipevdoc;. We call dndiq "decep¬ 
tion," because in it the appurtenance of the essence of ipevdot; to the 
essential realm of dAqdeia becomes visible anew. We must think this 



66 


The Third Directive [ 97 — 97 ] 


word, in everything it denotes, exclusively in the Greek way. ’A-naxq 
is the off-way and the by-way. For the Greeks, however, the basic fea¬ 
ture of the way —q 666(;, q fiedoSot; (“method")—is that by conveying 
along the course, underway, it opens up a view and a perspective and 
hence provides the disclosure of something. 

In connection with this remark on the essence of the way, we must 
recall the first verse we selected from Parmenides' "didactic poem," 
where the goddess greets the thinker arnving on a "way" and immedi¬ 
ately reveals to him that it is his destiny to have to go along an extraordi¬ 
nary way exToq ndiov, outside of, off, the path men usually tread. 
That means something else will show itself to the thinker on his way, 
a view the usual way does not offer to men. Since something extraordi¬ 
nary shows itself on the revealing way of the thinker, we have here 
a self-showing, i.e., a disclosing, in a "distinguished" sense. That is also 
why a larger fragment of the "didactic poem" speaks of oqpaxa, 
"signs." There exists an essential connection between the essence of 
the goddess ’AAqdeia and the ways leading to her home, which are 
determinable on the basis of this home. "Way," as providing appear¬ 
ances by opening up a view and a perspective, belongs within the realm 
of ctAqdeia. Conversely, ciAqdtio and its holding sway require the ways. 
This essential correlation between ctAqdeia and 060 ^ later comes to 
be known only in a concealed manner, as far as its essential ground 
is concerned, i.e., in the "fact" that a "method" is necessary to obtain 
correct representations. The way, naxoq, ncnq, of the thinker does in¬ 
deed go off the usual path of men. Yet we leave it open whether this 
"way off" is just a by-way. It could also be the reverse, that the usual 
way of man is merely a perpetual by-way ignorant of itself A way 
off the path, however, does not have to be a by-way in the sense of 
what is "way out" and unusual. Even a by-way is again not necessarily 
an off-way. The latter, however, is called ctnctiq. The views afforded 
by the off-way represent distortions of that which comes into view on 
the way leading straight to the thing. "To lead on an off-way" is to 
mix up the ways, it is a kind of dissembling and distorting, a kind 
of ifJEvSoq, and hence is deception. Everything of this sort "runs" 
counter to unconcealedness, counter to truth, and is consequently a 
kind of untruth, or, put in the Greek fashion, a not-disclosing and hence 
a concealing. 

The essence of ij/evdoc;, thought as the Greeks understood it, receives 
elucidation from the essence of ctAqdeia, from unconcealedness, i.e., 
from disclosedness. V^evSot;, as the counter-essence to ctAqdeia, is then 
more clearly determined as dissembling concealment. AAqdeia for its 
part emerges more determinately as disclosedness in the manner of a 
non-dissembling letting-appear. Unconcealedness is non-dissemblance. 



§4 Multiplicity of the oppositions [97-100] 


67 


The question then arises whether dissemblance and distortion, to¬ 
gether with their essential variations, are the only possible modes of 
concealment. The answer must be in the negative, for other modes of 
concealment are possible. Here then is grounded the possibility that 
truth as unconcealedness and disclosure is related to still other modes 
of concealment, and that disclosedness, in its essence, is not fixed to 
non-dissemblance. 

To our way of thinking, this means that the counter-essence to truth 
is not exhausted or fulfilled in falsity. At the same time we might wonder 
whether the "counter" must necessarily have the sense of the purely 
adverse and hostile. 

Of course, for us today, because of the long and unshaken predomi¬ 
nance of falsity as the only known and acknowledged opposite to truth, 
it is quite "natural" and a "platitude" to say that only falsity, if anything, 
may stand opposed to truth. Therefore we are inclined to seek the 
counter-essence to ctAqdeia only in ifjfvSot;, even when discussing the 
Greek view. And in fact in a certain sense the Greeks themselves encour¬ 
age this tendency, because from early on they identified aXqdeq and 
aijjevSeq, with the result that ijjevSoq is precisely what is disclaimed 
by the a in dAqdeia. The lesson to be drawn is that even if we have 
taken ctAqdeia seriously, in the sense of unconcealedness and disclosed¬ 
ness, and have renounced every misinterpretation of ctAqdeia as veritas, 
that is still no guarantee we are experiencing ctAqdeia in its primordial 
essence. 

If ijjevdoq is not the one and only mode of concealment, what are 
the others? And how can another counter-essence to disclosedness be 
determined from them^ The Greeks expenence and express conceal¬ 
ment in many ways, not only within the sphere of the everyday han¬ 
dling and considering of things, but also from the ultimate perspective 
of beings as a whole. Death, night, day, light, the earth, the subter¬ 
ranean, and the supraterranean are pervaded by disclosure and con¬ 
cealment and remain mired in this essence. Emergence into the 
unconcealed and submergence into concealment dwell primordially 
everywhere. 

This dwelling of disclosure and concealment, in advance and every¬ 
where and always and for every being and in all Being, is expressed 
in the word of the Greeks. It is what is said primordially—the legendary. 
Therefore the essence of the word and of legend, as experienced by 
the Greeks, has its ground and its eminence in the fact that word and 
legend let appear disclosure and concealment, the disclosed and the 
concealed. 

The essential word is not the command, order, proclamation, prom¬ 
ise, or "doctrine." A fortiori, the word is never the merely adventitious 



68 


The Third Directive [lOO-IOIl 


"expression” of "representations." The word is a way of the disclosive 
preservation of the unconcealment and concealment of beings, a way 
that belongs only to Greek antiquity and is entrusted to its essence. 
In the word and as word the Being of beings is given in relation to 
the essence of man in such a way that the Being of beings, in virtue 
of this relation to man, lets man's essence emerge and lets it receive 
the determination we call the Greek one. According to this determina¬ 
tion, man is to ^(oov Aoyov e^ov —the being that emerges from itself, 
emerges in such a way that in this emerging (<pvoiq), and for it, it 
has the word. In the word, the being we call man comports itself to 
beings as a whole, in the midst of which man himself is. Zcoov means 
"living being." But we may not understand "life," here either in 
the late Greek, nor in the Roman, nor in the modern "biological" sense, 
as in "zoology." The "living being" is (pvaei dv, a being whose Being 
is determined by (pvmq, by emergence and self-opening. To be sure, 
this Greek determination of the essence of man was soon transformed 
by the Roman interpretation: (coov becomes animal, Aoyoq becomes 
ratio. Man is the animal rationale. In modern thought ratio, reason, is 
the essence of subjectivity, i.e., of the I-hood of man. Hence for Kant 
man is the "beast" (animal) that can say "I." If we think as "ani¬ 
mal" or more generally as "living being," in the modern-biological 
sense, then we are thinking in the Roman-modern and not the Greek 
marmer. All anthropology, the philosophical as well as the scientific- 
biological, understands man as the "thinking animal." In the centuries 
of metaphysics before Nietzsche, the essence of "life" and of "animality" 
was not yet understood as will to power, and man did not yet arrive 
at the pure self-empowering of himself to all power, and hence did 
not "surpass" the previous essential determination. Therefore, man of 
today has not yet super-passed man as he was up to now. He is not 
yet the super-man. 

This term, in the sense of Nietzsche's metaphysics, does not mean, 
contrary to popular opinion, a man who has outgrown the normal 
size, with a gigantic bone structure, as muscular as possible, with a 
low forehead, etc. Instead, "super-man" is an essentially metaphysical- 
historical concept and signifies man hitherto, always already deter¬ 
mined as animal rationale, who has passed into the essential domain 
of the will to power as the reality of all that is real. Therefore Nietzsche 
can say the man who has not yet become super-man is the "animal 
that has not yet been identified," i.e., the animal about whose essence 
a final metaphysical decision has not yet been made. Pursuant to this 
ultimate metaphysical determination of man, Spengler wrote in his 
much-read book Der Mensch und die Technik Beitrag zu einer Philosophie 
des Lebens, (1931, p. 54): "The character of the free beast of prey, in 



§4 Multiplicity of the oppositions [101-1031 


69 


its essential features, has been passed on from the individual to the 
organized people, the animal with one soul and many hands." Then he 
adds a note: "And with one head, not many." 

Through the Roman re-interpretation of the Greek experience of the 
essence of man, Aoyoc;, i.e„ the word, became ratio. The essence of 
the word is thus banished from its ground and from its essential locus. 
Ratio and reason take its place. Naturally, it is recognized and noted 
that man has the faculty of "language." Language, however, becomes 
one faculty among others. Finally, the curious situation arises that a 
special philosophy, the "philosophy of language," becomes necessary 
parallel to the "philosophy of art" and the "philosophy of technology." 
The appearance of a "philosophy of language" is a striking sign that 
knowledge of the essence of the word, i.e., the possibility of an experi¬ 
ence of the primordial essence of the word, has been lost for a long 
time. The word no longer preserves the relation of Being to man, but 
instead the word is a formation and thing of language. Language is 
one of man's possessions, just like eyes and ears, sensations and inclina¬ 
tions, thinking and willing; it is the faculty of expressing and communi¬ 
cating "lived experience." The word is explained on the basis of vocali¬ 
zation, and the latter is explained on the basis of language as a 
phenomenon of expression which happens to be at our disposal. Lan¬ 
guage and the word serve to assume "the true" and "truth" into the 
expressive form of the articulation of speech, and in this way they serve 
to announce them. Taken for itself, however, "truth" as "correctness" 
is a matter of the representation of objects. The representing takes place 
in the "interior," and language is the "extenorization" of this interior. 
Thereby correctness is communicated in a correct assertion, and the 
thinking and the rational activity of man enter into the expressive realm 
of language, with the consequence that it is considered wholly in order 
that already with the early Greeks aAqdeia occurs predominately in 
connection with enoc; and eintiv, with the word and the legendary 
word. But the ground for this "fact" does not reside in the character 
of language as "expression" but in the essence of aAqdeia, which, as 
the essence of Being itself, claims the essence of man for itself as that 
"being" that comports itself to beings as such. 

It is not because the truth is often also enunciated, but because the 
essence of word and legend is grounded in the essence of truth and 
belongs to it, that the Greek word for "true," ctAqdeq, occurs already 
in Homer "connected" above all with "speech." A Greek word for the 
word is 6 fivdaq. Another word for "word" is enoq. It is not accidental 
that the primordial poetizing word of the Greeks, the word of Homer, 
is an "epic." Again, another word for "word" is doyoc We have to think 
that the Greeks from early on had several words for "word." On the 



70 


The Third Directive [103-104] 


other hand, they do not have a word for "language." They have, of 
course, the word yAdxjoa, tongue. But they never think the word on 
the basis of the "tongue" by which the word is spoken. Thus their 
determination of the essence of man is not avdpcjiioq ^coov yA^ooav 
fjov—the living being that has the tongue. Cows and mules also have 
a "tongue." If, however, it is the essential feature of man to have the 
word and to appropriate it, and if the Greeks experience and under¬ 
stand the human being in this way, then is it not necessary that they, 
when they distinguish themselves and their humanity versus others, 
take as a point of reference for the distinction precisely this essential 
feature? 

The Greeks distinguish themselves from other peoples and call them 
pdpPapoi, ones who have a strange sort of speech which is not pvdot;, 
not Aoyot;, not enot;. For the Greeks, the opposite to "barbarism" is 
not "culture"; it is dwelling within pvdoq and A6y()(;. There has been 
"culture" only since the beginning of the modern period; it began the 
moment veritas became certitudo, when man posited himself for himself 
and made himself, by his own "cultivation," cultura, and by his own 
"creative work" a creator, i.e., a genius. The Greeks are not familiar 
with the likes of either "culture" or "genius." So it is cunous that even 
today the best classical philologists ramble on about the "cultural ge¬ 
nius" of the Greeks. From the standpoint of the Greeks, what is called 
"culture" in the modern period is an organization of the "spiritual 
world" produced by the willful power of man. "Culture" is the same 
in essence as modern technology; both are in a strict Greek sense 
unmythical Thought in the Greek way, "culture" and "technology" 
arc forms of barbarism, no less than is "nature" in Rousseau. 

MvOoc;, enoq, and Adyoq belong together essentially "Myth" and 
"logos" appear in an erroneously much-discussed opposition only be¬ 
cause they arc the same in Greek poetry and thought In the ambiguous 
and confusing title "mythology," the words pvdot; and A6yo(; are con¬ 
nected in such a way that both forfeit their primordial essence. To try 
to understand pvdoc; with the help of "mythology" is a procedure 
equivalent to drawing water with the aid of a sieve. When we use the 
expression "mythical," we shall think it in the sense just delimited 
the "mythical"—the pvd()c;-'\ca\ —is the disclosure and concealment 
contained in the disclosing-conccaling word, which is the primordial 
appearance of the fundamental essence of Being itself The terms death, 
night, day, the earth, and the span of the sky name essential modes 
of disclosure and concealment. 



§5 Concealment and forgetting [104-1061 


71 


§5. The opposite to aXqdeq: Aadov, Aadet;. The event of the trans¬ 
formation of the withdrawing concealment and the human behavior 

of forgetting. 


a) The prevailing of concealment in Aavdaveodai. 

The concealment of the forgetter in the forgotten; oblivion. 

Hesiod, Theogony, V. 226f. Aqdq and the hidden essence 
of Eris (Strife), the daughter of the night. Reference to Pindar. 

In discussing the opposite of ciAqdeq (the unconcealed and the disclos¬ 
ing), we already remarked that the opposite would have to reside in 
a Aadeq, Aadov, if it were to be expressed in language immediately 
and appropriately. Instead of that we first encountered id ipevSoq. But 
this also became clear, that for the Greeks Aavddveiv, being-concealed, 
has an unequivocal prevailing essential rank, expressed in the proper 
“ruling" function of the phrase Aavddvo) qxov, I approach unnoticed, 
or, in the Greek way: I am in hiddenness as one who is approaching. 
On the basis of these apparently only “grammaticar' relations, there 
occurs something else, which we may formulate briefly in this way: 
concealedness and unconcealedness determine beings as such. That 
means disclosedness and concealment are a basic feature of Being. 

The Greeks express the prevailing of concealment above all, however, 
in the word Aavdaveodai or eiiiAavdaveodai, which we ordinanly 
translate as "forgetting" and thereby reinterpret it in such a way that 
the Greek essence is lost. Our earlier meditation already showed that 
in "forgetting" there occurs, for the Greeks, a concealment. The forgot¬ 
ten is, in the experience of the Greeks, what has sunk away into con¬ 
cealedness, specifically in such a fashion that the sinking away, i.e , 
the concealing, remains concealed to the very one who has forgotten 
More precisely and more in the Greek vein, the forgetter is concealed 
to himself in his relation to what is happening here to that which we 
then call, on account of this happening, the forgotten. The forgetter 
not only forgets the forgotten, but along with that he forgets himself 
as the one for whom the forgotten has disappeared. A concealment 
takes place here that at once befalls the forgotten and the forgetter, 
without, however, obliterating them. 

This concealment di.splays a special radiation. For the event of such 
concealment we have only the word "oblivion"—which actually names 
that into which the forgotten sinks—as the occurrence excluding man 
from the forgotten. In general we conceive forgetting in terms of the 
behavior of a "subject," as a not-retaining, and we then speak of "for¬ 
getfulness" as that by which something "escapes" us, when, because 
of one thing, we forget another. Here forgetfulness is poor attention. 



72 


The Third Directive [106-1071 


In addition, there is the forgetting explained as a consequence of 
"memory-disturbances." Psychopathology calls this "amnesia." But the 
word "forgetfulness" is too weak to name the forgetting that can befall 
man; for forgetfulness is only the inclination toward distraction. If it 
happens that wc forget what is essential and do not pay heed to it, 
lose it and strike it from our minds, then we may no longer speak 
of "forgetfulness" but of "oblivion." The latter is a realm something 
may arrive at and come to and fall into, but oblivion also befalls us 
and we ourselves permit it in a certain way. A more appropriate name 
for the event of oblivion is the obsolete word "obliviation" [Vergessung]: 
something falls into oblivion. Wc are always in such a hurry that we 
can scarcely pause a moment to inquire into "oblivion." Is oblivion, 
into which "something" falls and sinks, only a consequence of the fact 
that a number of people no longer think of this "something"? Or is 
the latter, that people no longer think of something, already for its part 
only a consequence of the fact that people themselves are thrust into 
an oblivion and can therefore no longer know either what they possess 
or what they have lost? What then is oblivion? It is not just a human 
product and it is not simply human negligence. 

If we now think of oblivion as the concealedness belonging to a char¬ 
acteristic concealment, then wc first approach what the Greeks name 
with the word Aqdq. In Hesiod's Theogony (V. 226f) we read; 

AOrap "Epiq (nvyept) icxe pev IIovov aAyivoevia 

Aqdqv Tf Aipov ly xai 'AXyt'a tiaxpvoEvia 

"But the (goddess) Stnfe, the dark one, gave birth to TVouble, the one 

who bnngs sorrow. 

As well as Oblivion and Absence and Suffenng, the tearful.” 

Aqdq, "Lethe" is the daughter of "Eris." She is mentioned to¬ 
gether with Aqioq, mistakenly translated as "Hunger." Of course forget¬ 
ting is "painful" just as "hunger" is painful and agonizing. But the ef¬ 
fects of forgetting and of hunger on the state of the body and soul, 
i.e., in modern terms, the physiological and psychological, or, in short, 
the "biological," aspects of forgetting and hunger do not "interest" the 
Greeks. Therefore something else is meant when Aqdq and Aqidq are 
mentioned together. It is not their effects on man but their own essence 
that sustains their identity. Aqdq, oblivion, is a concealment that with¬ 
draws what is essential and alienates man from himself, i.e., from the 
possibility of dwelling within his own essence. Aqioq does not mean 
"hunger" in the sense of the desire for food; the word is connected 
to Aei'no), to leave, to let disappear, and means absence of nourishment. 
Aqioq does not mean the non-satisfaction of human desires and needs, 
but it refers to the occurrence of the absence of a donation and distribu- 



§5 Concealment and forgetting [107-1091 


73 


tion. Such absence is essentially characterized by falling-away, as is con¬ 
cealment. Let us reflect on this: something falls and thereby falls away. 
This falling away is a kind of bcing-away and being-absent. What falls 
away no longer returns to what is present, and yet this “away" turns, 
in its turning away, against what is present, and specifically in the un¬ 
canny fashion that it takes no notice of it. Here we catch sight of the 
hidden essence of the oppositional and the conflictual, which explains 
why Aqdi] and .hpoq are said to be descended from “Eris,” the goddess 
“Strife." If hardship and suffering are mentioned here as descendants 
of Strife, then precisely this origin in strife should teach us to avoid 
the modern misinterpretation and not attempt to understand pain and 
suffenng “psychologically” as kinds of “lived experiences." Our usual 
interpretation of them in terms of lived experience is the main reason 
Greek tragedy is still entirely sealed off to us. Aeschylus-Sophocles on 
the one side, and Shakespeare on the other, are incomparable worlds. 
German humanism has mixed them up and has made the Greek world 
completely inaccessible. Goethe is disastrous. 

In Hesiod's Theogony only this is said about Aqdq, that it, together 
with hpoq, was born to Eris. 'T.pic; herself is the daughter of Nv^, 
which is called oAoq, an eponym in Homer and Hesiod often belonging 
to Moif)a. We translate oAoq as “ruinous." This again is "correct," and 
yet it is quite un-Greek, for we do not see why the night is supposed 
to be “ruinous.” To ruin is to destroy, to annihilate, i.e., to deprive 
of being, i.e., for the Greeks, to take away presence. The night is oAoq 
because it lets all that is present disappear into concealment In what 
respect Moipa is called oAoq will be clarified when we consider Par¬ 
menides' expression, Moipa xaxq, “evil fate.” What Hesiod says of 
Aqdq is sufficient for the Greeks to grasp the essence; however, for 
us moderns it is too little and does not enable us to see clearly the 
essence of AqOq and to recognize its essential relation to dAqdeia. In¬ 
deed we often encounter Aqdq, especially in the poets, although they 
do not mention it in the decisive way the thinkers speak of dAqdtia. 
Perhaps it rather corresponds to the essence of Aqdq to be passed over 
in silence. We reflect too rarely on the fact that the same Greeks to 
whom the word and speech were bestowed primordially could, for that 
very reason, keep silent in a unique way as well. Eor "to keep silent” 
is not merely to say nothing. Without something essential to say, one 
cannot keep silent. Only within essential speech, and by means of it 
alone, can there prevail essential silence, having nothing in common 
with secrecy, concealment, or "mental reservations.” The Greek think¬ 
ers and poets largely keep silent over Aqdq. But perhaps it is not an 
accident that at the time of the completion of the Greek world the 
essence of Aqdq was once more explicitly remembered in a significant 
context. Before we consider it in detail, let us take up a verse from 



74 


The Third Directive [109-1101 


Pindar's seventh Olympic Ode, for it can clarify the Greek essence of 
Aqdq in one important respect Of course we must renounce listening 
to the poetic splendor of this Ode as a whole or even only of the part 
immediately concerning us. 


b) Awe in Pindar, Olympic Ode VII, 48f.; 43ff.; and in Sophocles, 
Oedipus at Colonus, 1267. ’Apeii) (resoluteness) as the 
disclosedness of man, determined on the basis of dXqdeia and aidwq. 

The poet is telling the pvdoqof the colonization of the celebrated island 
of Rhodes. The colonists came without a source oi gleaming fire and 
therefore had to set up a sacred place and have sacrifices without fire 
on the high point of the city "Lindos," i.e., on its axpoiioAiq. 

h' anvpon, iVpoi’c 

dAocx, ('\' axf><>tt<'>\i ' 

It was surely not on account of arbitrary negligence that the colonists 
came without fire. Something must have occurred that was not due 
simply to them themselves, just as in general what man does and allows, 
what man experiences and is capable of, is determined by a properly 
determining essence. It is with a reference to this latter that the "myth" 
of the foundation of the city is introduced (a a O , 43ff) 

f'v h' api ia\ 

FfiaAi\ xai \(if>pai ' a\ dfxAttouji IlpopctOux, AiSiix,' 

Ftti pd\ fiahini xai laiVoc diFxpapia v((p(>i;, 
xai ttaf>FAxii iiftaypaaov 6p0d\ oSdv 
f(oj (pf>FV(0\' 

"Awe thrusts up the flourishing of the essence and tlie joy disposing man 
to think ahead, hut sometimes there comes over it the signless cloud of 
concealment, which withholds from actions the straightforward way and 
places them outside what is thoughtfully disclosed " 

These words provide a very beautiful poetic elucidation of the essence 
of Aqdi], Here Addo stands in opposition to oidcjc;. We translate by 
"awe." But that word is not meant to denote a "subjective" feeling 
or a "lived experience" of the human "subject." Aidax, (awe) comes 
over man as what is determining, i e., disposing. As is clear on the 
basis of the opposition to Adda (concealment), awe determines dAip 
dt'ia, the unconcealed in its unconcealedness, in which the whole es¬ 
sence of man stands together with all human laculties Aidcoc,, a funda¬ 
mental word of Pindar's jtoetry and consequently a fundamental word 


1 "They set up a sacred grove on the acropolis with tireless sacrifices "—TV 



§5 Concealment and forgetting {IIO-IU] 


75 


of the Greeks themselves, never means, even if we understand awe 
as a disposition, mere bashfulness, anxiousness, or fearfulness The easi¬ 
est way to touch the essence of awe [Scheu] as meant here is on the 
basis of its counter-essence, "abhorrence" \Abxheu\. Awe disposes us 
toward thinking in advance what disposes the essence of man out of 
beings as a whole. Aihdx ;—thought in the Greek manner—is not a 
feeling man possesses but the disposition, as the disposing, which deter¬ 
mines his essence, i e,, determines the relation of Being to man. There¬ 
fore o/'AVac, as the highest, lies in essential proximity to the highest 
god, /.eve;. Thus Sophocles says (Oedip Col., 1267), 

all’f'Vni )df> xai /jj\i (>u\ d(zx(n, df>6\(ij\ 

AiScoz: at' i'fiyoK udoi, 

"But .Aibfjs, together with Zeus, holds the throne of essence, raised above 

all others" (beings man produces and sets up) 

Being itself sustains awe, namely the awe over the "to be," In this 
way Being at the very beginning is protective of its own essence. Aido'zc; 
refers to this awe, which thrusts something upon man, t ve^a.h t 
dpeiax. 'Af)€it'] is just as essential a Greek word as is aidax;, and 
the word dfx id (t'j) is even more untranslatable "Virtue" has too much 
of a "moralistic" ring, "suitability," if thought in relation to "ability" 
and "performance," sounds all the more "modern" and would lead 
us astray, 'Afintj means the emergence and opening up and insertion 
of man's fundamental essence in Being. Aptit] is related to ipvd, Pin¬ 
dar's word for the essence of man as it emerges into unconcealedness 
'Apeit'] and dpivio are of the same stem as the Latin ars, which became 
the Roman word for ii\vt]. and which we translate by "art." On the 
basis of the insertion, emergence, and openness of man's essence in 
dpeii], he is "resolute," open, disclosing, and disclosed toward beings. 
In such dpt'id, re-soluteness, man is in the literal sense "de-cided" with 
regard to the Being of beings, that is, "de-cision" means to be without 
a scission from Being, 

Afieid as understood by the Greeks, "resoluteness," man's disclosed- 
ness as determined by d\t']dn(z and aihux;, is something essentially dif¬ 
ferent from the modern notion of "resoluteness," grounded on man 
as "subject," The essence of this resoluteness is based on the act of 
will of man positing himself willfully on himself and only on himself 
The resoluteness of the modern Renaissance man derives from the will 
to will. Here belongs dpm] as thought in the Roman way = virtus, 
in Italian virtu', whence the word "virtuosity," "Resoluteness" in the 
modern sense is the fixed ordination of the will upon itself and belongs 
metaphysically within the essence of the will to will, the present form 
of which is exhibited by the will to power. Resoluteness in the modern 



76 


The Third Directive [111—1131 


sense is metaphysically not grounded on dAqdeia but on the self- 
assurance of man as subject, i.e,, on subjectivity. Resoluteness, as con¬ 
ceived in the modern way, is the willing of what is willed in its own 
will; this will drives it to willing, "Being-driven" is in Latin fanatice. 
The distinguishing characteristic of modern resoluteness is "the fanati¬ 
cal." As understood by the Greeks, however, resoluteness, the self¬ 
disclosing opening up toward Being, has another origin of essence, 
namely a different experience of Being—one based on ai’Scoq, awe. Awe 
thrusts to man, and bestows on him, apeia. Awe as the essence of 
Being conveys to man the disclosure of beings. But opposed to aiScoq 
there holds sway Adda, the concealment we call oblivion. 


Recapitulation 


I) The three titles of the essential history of the Occident. 

Reference to Being and Time. Essential thinking. Reference 
to Holderlin and Pindar. The beginning of the essential relation 
of Being to man in word and legendary word. The Greek essence 
of man. Reference to Hesiod. 

Beyond the modes of dissemblance and distortion, there prevails a con¬ 
cealment appearing in the essence of death, of the night and everything 
nocturnal, and of the earth and everything subterranean and supra- 
terranean. Such concealment pervades beings as a whole, from first 
to last. Yet it bears in itself a mode of possible disclosure and uncon¬ 
cealedness of beings as such, one that in advance penetrates everything. 
But wherever, as well as however, beings let themselves emerge for 
the Greeks into unconcealedness, there Being is "put into words" in 
an eminent way. In view of the pnmordial, all-pervasive occurrence 
of concealment and disclosure, the word is no less original in essence 
than disclosure and concealment. The proper essence of the word is 
that it lets beings appear in their Being and preserves what appears, 
i.e., the unconcealed, as such. Being manifests itself primordially in 
the word. 

If we attempt to discover, from this primordial essential relation of 
Being and word, the hidden essential history of the Occident, then we 
can name the simple events of this history with three titles. (The use 
of such titles is of course always precarious if one does not go beyond 
the mere titles.) The beginning of the essential history of the Occident 
can be expressed by the title "Being and word." The "and" indicates 
an essential relation which Being itself (and not man, who can only 



§5 Concealment and forgetting [II3-II41 


11 


reflect on it subsequently) lets emerge in order to bring its essence to 
truth therein. With Plato and Aristotle, who speak the beginning of 
metaphysics, the word becomes Xoyoq in the sense of assertion. In the 
course of the unfolding of metaphysics this is transformed into ratio, 
reason, and spirit. Western metaphysics, the history of the essence of 
the truth of beings as such and as a whole, the history expressed in 
thinking from Plato to Nietzsche, comes under the title "Being and 
ratio." That is why, in the age of metaphysics and only in it, "the irra¬ 
tional" also appears and, in its wake, "lived experience." As regards 
the title "Being and time," "time" means here neither the calculated 
time of the "clock," nor "lived time" in the sense of Bergson and others. 
The name "time" in this title, according to its clearly expressed affilia¬ 
tion with Being, is the given name of a more original essence of a.\i]dt'ia 
and designates the essential ground of ratio and of all thinking and 
saying. In "Being and time," no matter how strange it must sound, 
"time" is the given name of the primordial ground of the word "Being 
and word," the beginning of the essential history of the West, is thereby 
experienced more primordially. The treatise Being and Time only points 
to this event in which Being itself bestows on Western man a more 
primordial experience. This more original beginning can only occur as 
the first beginning to a historical people of thinkers and poets in the 
West. These statements have nothing in common with a swaggering 
missionary consciousness; quite to the contrary, they have to do with 
the experience of the confusions and the difficulties with which a people 
can only slowly fit itself into the place of the destiny of the West, a 
destiny that conceals a world-destiny 
Therefore we need to know that this historical people, if the word 
"victory" is appropriate here at all, has already been victorious and 
is invincible, provided it remains the people of poets and thinkers that 
it is in its essence, and as long as it does not fall prey to the terrible— 
always menacing—deviation from and mistaking of its essence 

I am not saying anything new here, as no thinker at all may he the 
slave of the pleasure to say the new. To find new things and to search 
for them is a matter of "research" and technology. Essential thinking 
must always say only the same, the old, the oldest, the beginning, and 
must say it primordially How is this expressed by Holderlin, who is 
the most German poet because he poetizes inspired by the Western 
history of Being itself, and who is therefore the first poet of the Germans 
to appear, how is it expressed in his poem entitled "The song of the 
German"?' 


1 Holderlin, Werke (Helliiinrath), IV p 12^ Even the neiiltive in this title is already 
enigmatically equivocal 



78 


The Third Directive [114-116] 


O holy heart of the people, O fatherland' 

Patiently accepting everything like the .silent mother earth 
And altogether unappreciated, even if already the others 
Obtain from your depths what is best in them 

They harvest the thoughts and the spirit from you. 

They love to pick the grapes, and yet they blame 
You, unshaped wine-stalk' that you 

Err around on the soil wildly and wavering 

For the Greeks the word as pvdoq, i'lioq, ‘pqpa. and Aoyot; is that 
by which Being assigns itself to man, so that he might preserve it, in 
his own essence, as what is assigned to him and might, for his part, 
Hnd and retain his essence as man by means of such preservation. 
Therefore the destiny, "to have the word," Aoyov £\t;v, is the essen¬ 
tial characteristic of the humanity that became historical as Greek 
humanity. 

Because legend, as the disclosing word, harbors the primordial rela¬ 
tion of Being to man, and thereby also the relation of man to beings, 
legend and legendary dictum are, as beings, more than every other 
being that man in some way creates and sets up. The the dictum 

that speaks and is spoken, surpasses all tpypaia, according to Pindar 
(Nem IV, 8) Nevertheless, not just any word is superior to every other 
"work," but only that dictum standing in the favor of so that 

in the word the bestowal of the grace of emergent Being appears We 
of today, and in general modern "culture," can now hardly obtain even 
a vague idea of how for the Greeks the word and legend initiate, sustain, 
and fulfill the essential relation of Being to man. In particular, the ordi¬ 
nary and most accessible "picture" of ancient Greece would prevent 
us from duly reflecting on the all-sustaining relation between Being 
and word. For we are told that the works of architecture and scul[)ture 
of the Greeks, their temples and statues, their vases and paintings, are 
no less an "expression" of Greek lived experience than their tliought 
and poetry. Accordingly, the emphasis we placed on the relation be¬ 
tween Being and word, if not exactly "false," would in any case he 
one-sided. Our meditation on the essence of d.\i']dna will return to 
this objection at the appropriate place 

Only where a humanity is cntiusted with the essence, to have the 
word, .\6yov t\nv, only there does it remain assigned to the preserva¬ 
tion of the unconcealedness of beings. Only where this assignment 
holds sway and where unconcealedness appears in advance as Being 
itself, only there does concealment also prevail in a way that can never 
be the mere contrary and crude opposite to disclosure, i.e., in the modes 
of dissemblance, distortion, misguidance, deception, and lalsihcation. 

Because there is still a more original mode of concealment to be dis- 



§5 Concealment and forgetting [116-117] 


79 


tinguished from all that, the Greeks named it with a word which, in 
distinction to ipevSot; and dndiq and o<pd\\eiv, immediately seizes 
upon the relation to the original stem: concealment as Xqdq. 

But now since knowledge of the essence of dAqdeia is co-deter- 
mined by a knowledge of the essence oiXqdq, and since we who live so 
much later are wont to interpret Aqdq, understood as "forgetting," 
in the sense of the "lived experience" and comportment of a "sub¬ 
ject," therefore it is necessary to recognize clearly in advance the 
essential connections prevalent in the relation between Aqdq and 
dAqdeia. 

Granted, the Greek thinkers did not speak of these essential relations 
as we now are forced to express them. Precisely because the Greek 
essence of man is fulfilled in the "to have the word," Greek man could 
also "have" and retain the word in that pre-eminent way we call silence. 
The Greeks are often silent, especially about what is essential to them. 
And when they do express the essential, it is in a way that even then 
does not break the silence. Here we are referring to the ground of the 
pre-eminence of the tragic word in their tragedies. This is the tragic 
word's essential ambiguity, not created by the poets for its dramatic 
"effect" but spoken to them out of the essence of Being, 

Why should not the Greeks, who "have" the word in such a way, 
keep silent and comport themselves in a concealing way precisely where 
they experience the original concealment itself, Aqdq7 But how could 
they keep silent about it without sometimes speaking of it? Hesiod men¬ 
tions Aqdq together with Aqioq, i,e,, together with the absence of nour¬ 
ishment, Both originate in the concealing night as the provenance of 
their essence, Pindar names the veiling essence of Aqdq in another re¬ 
spect and directs our regard to its hidden essence. 


c) npayfia: action. The word as the realm of the essence of the 
human hand. Handwriting and typewriting. ’Opdoq and rectum. 
Essential action and the way toward the unconcealed. Oblivion as 
concealment. Man's being "away" from unconcealedness, and the 
word of the signless cloud. Darkening. The withdrawal of Aqdq. 

Reference to Pindar and Hesiod. 

Pindar speaks of Aaddq diexpapia ve<poq, i,e,, the signless cloud of 
concealment. Thereby he indicates unequivocally the veiling essence 
of what we call "oblivion," The cloud, passing or standing in front 
of the sun, conceals the brightness of the sky, hides the light, and with¬ 
draws clarity. It brings darkening and gloom over things as well as over 
man, i,e., over the relation of both to one another, over that in which 
this relation dwells. As a consequence of the darkening, the things 
themselves, the aspect they present, and the regard of men viewing 



80 


The Third Directive [117-119] 


that aspect—in short, things and men—no longer stay and move in 
the originally arisen light. If the veiling cloud of oblivion inipaivei — 
comes over things and man—then napeAxei npayponov opdav 66dv 
/ e^o) (ppsvdlv —"it draws actions apart from the straightforward way, 
into what is outside the thoughtfully disclosed," 

Here we encounter the word npdypa, customarily translated as 
"thing" or "fact," "matter," "issue," Hpano) means to pass through, 
pervade, travel back a path through what is not removed and on this 
way arnve at something and thereupon set it up as present (epycj, epyov 
belong in the same sphere of meaning), 

npdypa means originally, and still in Pindar, this setting up itself 
as well as what is set up; more precisely, npdypa means the original 
unity of both in their relation—the still unseparated and essentially 
inseparable unity of the setting up in the arrival at something and of 
what is reached in the arrival and is then present as unconcealed, 
ripdypa is here not yet distinguished and set apart and separated as 
thing and fact from npd^iq as presumed "activity," Ilpdypa is not yet 
narrowed down to the concept of "thing," the matter "at hand" to 
be dealt with, to be acted upon Nevertheless we have translated 
npdypa precisely by "action" [Handlung]. Although "action" is not the 
literal translation of npdypa, yet, correctly understood, "action" does 
touch the originally essential essence of npdypa. Things "act" [han- 
deln], insofar as the things present and at hand dwell within the reach 
of the "hand" [Hand]. The hand reaches out for them and reaches them: 
npdiiei, the reaching arrival at something (npdypa), is essentially re¬ 
lated to the hand 

Man himself acts [handed] through the hand [Hand]; for the hand 
is, together with the word, the essential distinction of man. Only a 
being which, like man, "has" the word (pvdoq, Adyog), can and must 
"have" "the hand," Through the hand occur both prayer and murder, 
greeting and thanks, oath and signal, and also the "work" of the hand, 
the "hand-work," and the tool. The handshake seals the covenant. The 
hand brings about the "work" of destruction. The hand exists as hand 
only where there is disclosure and concealment. No animal has a hand, 
and a hand never originates from a paw or a claw or talon. Even the 
hand of one in desperation (it least of all) is never a talon, with which 
a person clutches wildly. The hand sprang forth only out of the word 
and together with the word. Man does not "have" hands, but the hand 
holds the essence of man, because the word as the essential realm of 
the hand is the ground of the essence of man. The word as what is 
inscribed and what appears to the regard is the written word, i.e,, script. 
And the word as script is handwriting. 

It is not accidental that modern man writes "with" the typewriter 
and "dictates" [dikiiert] (the same word as "poetize" [Dichten]) "into" 



§5 Concealment and forgetting [119-120] 


81 


a machine. This "history” of the kinds of writing is one of the main 
reasons for the increasing destruction of the word. The latter no longer 
comes and goes by means of the writing hand, the properly acting hand, 
but by means of the mechanical forces it releases. The typewriter tears 
writing from the essential realm of the hand, i,e,, the realm of the word. 
The word itself turns into something "typed," Where typewriting, on 
the contrary, is only a transcription and serves to preserve the writing, 
or turns into pnnt something already wntten, there it has a proper, 
though limited, significance. In the time of the first dominance of the 
typewriter, a letter written on this machine still stood for a breach of 
good manners. Today a hand-written letter is an antiquated and unde¬ 
sired thing; it disturbs speed reading. Mechanical writing depnves the 
hand of its rank in the realm of the wntten word and degrades the 
word to a means of communication. In addition, mechanical writing 
provides this "advantage," that it conceals the handwnting and thereby 
the character. The typewriter makes everyone look the same. 

We understand "action" {npdypa) as the unitary essential realm of 
the things "at hand" and of the "manipulating" acting man. To "action" 
thus understood there belongs by essential necessity q dSot;, the way, 
as the circumspective course going to and fro between what is at hand 
and the "manipulating" acting man. The way, dib'dc, is called opdd. 
The Greek opdoq means "straight ahead," on and along the way, 
namely the way of the view and prospect toward the unconcealed. 
The basic meaning of optloq is different from the Roman rectum, that 
which is directed toward what is above because it directs from above 
and commands and "rules" from above. The Roman rectitude has also 
misconstrued the Greek dpdoiijK, which belongs to opomoiq, whose 
essence is onginally attached to dAijdeia. The disclosive assimilation 
to the unconcealed within unconcealedness is a going along, namely 
along the way leading straight ahead, dpdcoq, to the unconcealed, 
‘Opoitooiq is opddiqt;. 'Opdot;, thought in the Greek manner, has, pri- 
mordially, nothing in common with the Roman rectum or with our 
"right," To the essential realm of npdypa, i,e,, to action essentially un¬ 
derstood, belongs the way going straight ahead "toward the uncon¬ 
cealed," Insofar as the veiling cloud brings gloom, the way providing 
the view lacks that clarity which would lead it straight away toward 
the unconcealed. Therefore the cloud, within action, leads the way 
astray (napd —beside, off), leads outside of what the thinking ahead, 
the reflecting, and the commemorating provide when they are guided 
by awe, TYansposed into concealment, as such a darkening, man stands 
in a certain way outside of what is unconcealed. 

The word "cloud" suggests an experience, and not a mere lived expe¬ 
rience, of the essence of oblivion. But no less essential is the poetic 
charactenzation of the concealing cloud. It is called diexpapia. The 



82 


The Third Directive [120-122] 


cloud is signless; that means it does not show itself at all. This conceal¬ 
ment as darkening keeps itself in hiddenness. All darkening always 
leaves behind a brightness, which, taken for itself, can "appear" as the 
only brightness. In the fact that the cloud of forgetting concealment 
conceals itself as such, the uncanny character of forgetting comes to 
the fore. Forgetting itself occurs already in an oblivion. If we forget 
something, we are no longer with it, but instead we are already "away," 
"drawn aside," If, in forgetting, we were still with the thing, then we 
could always retain what is forgotten, and then forgetting would never 
occur at all. The forgetting must already have pushed us out of our 
own essential realm, so that we can no longer dwell with that which 
is to fall into oblivion. The essence of the veiling concealment of obliv¬ 
ion is first touched by the significant word dnexpapia. "signless," in 
the sense of "not showing itself," "hiding itself" Nevertheless, we have 
not yet exhausted the essence of the "signless" as expenenced by the 
Greeks and consequently the essence of oblivion as concealment, 

Texpap is the sign, that which shows, that which, while it shows 
itself, at the same time shows the condition of some being which human 
comportment reaches and has to reach. Our word "trademark" [ Wahr- 
zeichen: literally: "true-sign"] would be an appropriate translation, pro¬ 
vided we think the "true" in the Greek sense. What shows itself, the 
unconcealed, the indicator, can subsequently also mean "goal," But 
the essence of the "goal" for the Greeks is the limitation and demarca¬ 
tion of the direction and range of comportment. Thought in the modern 
way, a "goal" is only the provision of an "intermediate" stage within 
the limitlessness of the ever increasing successes and concerns. The limit 
{nepaq), as thought by the Greeks, is, however, not that at which some¬ 
thing stops, but that in which something originates, precisely by origi¬ 
nating therein as being "formed" in this or that way, i,e,, allowed to 
rest in a form and as such to come into presence. Where demarcation 
is lacking, nothing can come to presence as that which it is, ’Aiexpapia 
ve<poq, the signless cloud, i,c„ the cloud that also withholds its own 
presence, is an absent concealment that does not show itself We can 
now surmise something of the essence of "oblivion," It might therefore 
be appropriate to accentuate once more the principal moments we have 
uncovered. 

Forgetting, as a kind of concealing, is an event that comes over beings 
and over man in his relation to them. Oblivion occurs within the realm 
of the essence of action. Forgetting is not a "subjective lived experi¬ 
ence," not a "subjective state" in the sense of a "lapse of memory," 
etc. The concealment here does not touch only what is past but also 
what is present and, above all, what, in thinking ahead, is approaching 
man and what befits his comportment by providing an assigned direc¬ 
tion, The way of man, if awe determines it and brings it the uncon- 



§5 Concealment and forgetting [122-123] 


83 


cealed, has such a direction. The way is then a directed opda oSoq. 
Only if the way can proceed into the unconcealed can it go on directly 
to the unconcealed and be the directed way. Only if it is in this manner 
the directed way is it the nght way. What is right has the possibility 
of its essence and the ground of its essence in the disclosing of uncon¬ 
cealedness, Since, for the Greeks, the opdoq —straight, along—holds 
sway and is present only in what is unconcealed and in what goes 
toward the unconcealed, hence only there is an assignment possible 
and a setting up and a "sup-plementing" in the sense of a determining 
direction without any concealing and dissembling—without an occur¬ 
rence of Aavdaveiv. Thus in the same place Hesiod calls Nereus 
aipevSea xai dAqdea, not distorting and not hiding, he also says of 
him ov8e depiorewv Aqdejai —he does not stand in concealedness with 
regard to the supplementing directions, 

(We will have to discuss depioreq and depiq when we return to the 
word of Parmenides, Nothing, however, can be said at all about depiq 
without a preceding meditation on the essence of deoiq, "positing," 
as the Greeks think it.) 

Forgetting, as experienced by the Greeks, is neither a subjective state, 
nor is it only related to the past and the "recollection" of it, and neither 
is it simply a matter of thinking in the sense of "re-presentation," Con¬ 
cealment places the entire essence of man in hiddenness and tears him 
in this way from the unconcealed, Man is "away" from it. He is no 
longer with it. He neglects and forsakes what is assigned to him. Con¬ 
cealment comes over man and draws him away from the npaypdncjv 
opddv d86v. Forgetting is no-longer-being-there-with-it and by no 
means only a no-longer-remembenng as the lack of a representation. 
We are tempted to say the Greeks conceived forgetting not only in rela¬ 
tion to cognitive comportment but also with regard to the "practical," 
But when we speak this way then we already think in a non-Greek 
way, for concealment concerns at the very outset man's entire being- 
with-beings. Only because this is so does forgetting concern at once 
and equiprimordially "theoretical" and "practical" comportment. 

On the basis of this elucidation of the essence of oblivion as conceal¬ 
edness, and in view of what is to follow, we can summarize in a kind 
of "definition" the meditation we have completed, Aqdq, oblivion, is 
the concealment that lets the past, the present, and the future fall into 
the path of a self-absenting absence. And with that it sets man himself 
away into concealedness in relation to this withdrawal, precisely in 
such a manner that this concealment for its part does not, on the whole, 
appear, Aqdq conceals while it withdraws. It withdraws while, with¬ 
holding itself, it lets the unconcealed and its disclosure lapse into the 
"away" of a veiled absence. 



84 


The Third Directive [124-125] 


Recapitulation 


2) The correlation between being, word, gathering, hand, and 
writing. The irruption of the typewriter into the realm of the word 
and of handwriting. The consequence of technology within the 
transformed relation of Being to man. Bolshevism: the 
pre-arranged completely technically organized world. The thinking 
and poetry of the Greeks as regards dAqdeia and Aqdq. 

Aqdq is concealment, and precisely the one that especially comes over 
things and man, over the reciprocal relation between them, and that 
draws everything in a certain sense away from a bestowed unconcealed¬ 
ness in such a manner that the very concealment thereby withdraws 
itself The passage we discussed from Pindar's Odes (Olympic Ode VII, 
48ff) was not only meant to point at the cloud-like and signless essence 
of lethe, but at the same time it was to indicate with equal decisiveness 
that this unique concealment comes over the iif)dypaia and, as it were, 
befalls them. Of course, it is important to realize iif)dypa means neither 
the thing for itself nor activity for itself (/7/>d^;c) I d iifydyiiaia is here 
rather the word for the one originally inseparable totality of the relation 
between things and man. We translate iipdypa as "action" \I1andlunq\. 
This word, however, does not mean human activity (actio) but the uni¬ 
tary way that at any time things are on hand and at hand, i.e., are 
related to the hand, and that man, in his comportment, i e , in his 
acting by means ol the hand, is posited in relation to the things 

From this it is clear how the hand in its essence secures the reciprocal 
relation between "beings" and man There is a "hand" only where be¬ 
ings as such appear in unconcealedness and man comports himself in 
a disclosing way toward beings. The hand entrusts to the word the 
relation of Being to man and, thereby, the relation of man to beings. 
The hand acts \Die Hand handelt\ The hand holds in its care the han¬ 
dling, the acting, the acted, and the manipulated Where the essential 
is secured in an essential way, we therefore say it is "in good hands," 
even if handles and manipulations are not actually necessary The essen¬ 
tial correlation of the hand and the word as the essential distinguishing 
mark of man is revealed in the fact that the hand indicates and by 
indicating discloses what was concealed, and thereby marks off and 
while marking off forms the indicating marks into formations [indem 
sie zeigt und zeigend zeichtiet inid zeicimend die zeigenden Zeichen zit Gebilden 
bildetl These formations are called, following the "verb" yf)d(ptiv, 
ypdpqiaia. The word indicated by the hand and appearing in such 
marking is writing. We still call the theory ol the structure ol language 
"grammar." 



§5 Concealment and forgetting [125-126] 


85 


Writing, from its originating essence, is hand-writing. We call the 
disclosive taking up and perceiving of the written word "reading" or 
"lection" [“Lesen"], i.e,, col-lection, gathering—("gleaning" [“Ahren 
lesen"]), in Greek Myeiv — Xoyoq', and this latter, among the pnmordial 
thinkers, is the name for Being itself Being, word, gathering, writing 
denote an original essential nexus, to which the indicating-writing hand 
belongs. In handwriting the relation of Being to man, namely the word, 
is inscribed in beings themselves. The origin and the way of dealing 
with writing is already in itself a decision about the relation of Being 
and of the word to man and consequently a decision about the comport¬ 
ment of man to beings and about the way both, man and thing, stand 
in unconcealedness or are withdrawn from it. 

Therefore when writing was withdrawn from the origin of its essence, 
i,e,, from the hand, and was transferred to the machine, a transforma¬ 
tion occurred in the relation of Being to man. It is of little importance 
for this transformation how many people actually use the typewnter 
and whether there are some who shun it. It is no accident that the 
invention of the printing press coincides with the inception of the mod¬ 
ern period. The word-signs become type, and the writing stroke disap¬ 
pears, The type is "set," the set becomes "pres,sed," This mechanism 
of setting and pressing and "printing" is the preliminary form of the 
typewriter. In the typewriter we find the irruption of the mechanism 
in the realm of the word. The typewriter leads again to the typesetting 
machine. The press becomes the rotary press. In rotation, the triumph 
of the machine comes to the fore. Indeed, at first, book printing and 
then machine type offer advantages and conveniences, and these then 
unwittingly steer preferences and needs to this kind of written commu¬ 
nication The typewriter veils the essence of wnting and of the script. 
It withdraws from man the essential rank of the hand, without man's 
experiencing this withdrawal appropriately and recognizing that it has 
transformed the relation of Being to his essence. 

The typewriter is a signless cloud, i.e., a withdrawing concealment 
in the midst of its very obtrusiveness, and through it the relation of 
Being to man is transformed. It is in fact signless, not showing itself 
as to its essence; perhaps that is why most of you, as is proven to 
me by your reaction, though well-intended, have not grasped what 
1 have been trying to say. 

I have not been presenting a disquisition on the typewriter itself, re¬ 
garding which it could justifiably be asked what in the world that has 
to do with Parmenides. My theme was the modern relation (trans¬ 
formed by the typewriter) of the hand to writing, i.e , to the word, 
i.e , to the unconcealedness of Being A meditation on unconcealedness 
and on Being does not merely have something to do with the didactic 
poem of Parmenides, it has everything to do with it. In the typewriter 



86 


The Third Directive [126-128] 


the machine appears, i.e,, technology appears, in an almost quotidian 
and hence unnoticed and hence signless relation to writing, i.e,, to the 
word, i.e,, to the distinguishing essence of man, A more penetrating 
consideration would have to recognize here that the typewriter is not 
really a machine in the stnct sense of machine technology, but is an 
"intermediate" thing, between a tool and a machine, a mechanism. 
Its production, however, is conditioned by machine technology. 

This "machine," operated in the closest vicinity to the word, is in 
use; it imposes its own use. Even if we do not actually operate this 
machine, it demands that we regard it if only to renounce and avoid 
it. This situation is constantly repeated everywhere, in all relations of 
modern man to technology. Technology is entrenched in our history. 

He who has ears to hear, i.e,, to grasp the metaphysical foundations 
and abysses of history and to take them seriously as metaphysical, could 
already hear two decades ago the word of Lemn: Bolshevism is Soviet 
power + electrification. That means: Bolshevism is the "organic," i.e,, 
organized, calculating (and as +) conclusion of the unconditional 
power of the party along with complete technization. The bourgeois 
world has not seen and in part still does not want to see today that 
in "Leninism," as Stalin calls this metaphysics, a metaphysical projec¬ 
tion has been performed, on the basis of which in a certain way the 
metaphysical passion of today's Russians for technology first becomes 
intelligible, and out of which the technical world is brought into power 
That the Russians, e,g,, are always building more tractor factories is 
not primarily what is decisive, but, rather, it is this, that the complete 
technical organization of the world is already the metaphysical founda¬ 
tion for all plans and operations and that this foundation is experienced 
unconditionally and radically and is brought into working complete¬ 
ness, Insight into the "metaphysical" essence of technology is for us 
historically necessary if the essence of Western historical man is to be 
saved. 

But technology understood as modern, i.e., as the technology of 
power machines, is itself already a consequence and not the foundation 
of a transformation of the relation of Being to man. Modern mechanical 
technology is the "metaphysical" instrumentanum of such a transfor¬ 
mation, referring back to a hidden essence of technology that encom¬ 
passes what the Greeks already called rfyvq. Perhaps the transformed 
relation of Being to man, appearing in technology, is of such a kind 
that Being has withdrawn itself from man and modern man has been 
plunged into an eminent oblivion of Being, (Consequently, man can 
now no longer, or in the first place cannot yet, ponder the question 
raised in Being and Time as it is raised there.) 

Perhaps the much-discussed question of whether technology makes 
man its slave or whether man will be able to be the master of technology 



§5 Concealment and forgetting [128-130] 


87 


is already a superficial question, because no one remembers to ask what 
kind of man is alone capable of carrying out the "mastery" of technol¬ 
ogy, The "philosophies" of technology pretend as if "technology" and 
"man" were two "masses" and things simply on hand, as if the way 
Being itself appears and withdraws had not already decided about man 
and technology, i.e,, about the relation between beings and man and 
hence about the hand and the word and the unfolding of their essence. 

The question of Aqdq interrogates this relation of Being to man, and 
therefore our elucidation of the essence of npdypa. the action of the 
hand, had to refer to the typewriter, assuming a thoughtful meditation 
is a thinking that thinks of our history (the essence of truth), in which 
the future comes toward us. 

People are generally inclined to consider philosophy an "abstract" 
affair. If now, apparently all of a sudden and arbitrarily, we speak of 
the typewriter, that is taken to be a digression, a view attesting to the 
fact that people are precisely not truly disposed to ponder the "concrete" 
they celebrate so much, i,e,, to come within the proximity of the essence 
of things and to remove the concealment thrust upon things by mere 
use and consumption, Aqdq and the typewriter—this is indeed not 
a digression for anyone not submerged in the oblivion of Being, 

According to Pindar, aiScoq, awe, by which Being itself cares for its 
essence, and through which essence it dispenses dAqdeia to beings and 
to man, has Adda for its counter-essence. The poetical words of Pindar 
about Aqdq attest to the fact that for the Greeks the mutual counter¬ 
essence of dAqdeia and Aqdq was experienced originally. We might 
therefore expect that this essential correlation between dAqdeia and 
Aqdq would also, in a correspondingly original way, be thought through 
by the Greeks and posed in thinking. This expectation is not fulfilled. 
The Greeks never did explicitly think through dAqdeia and Aqdq with 
regard to their essence and the ground of their essence, since already, 
i,e,, prior to all thinking and poetizing, these pervade the to-be-thought 
as its "essence," The Greeks think and poetize and "deal" within the 
essence of dAqdeia and of Aqdq. but they do not think and poetize 
about this essence and they do not "deal" with it. For the Greeks it 
suffices to be claimed by dAqdeia itself and to be encompassed by it. 
It is a sign of the necessity ruling its essence that Greek humanity, at 
its inception, does not need to think about the essence of dAqdeia (and 
of Aqdq). And when, at the time of the close of the Greek world, in 
a certain sense a thinking "about" dAqdeia is inaugurated, then this 
inauguration is precisely a sign of that imminent closing. But the history 
of the modern world and its generations is much different. 

When dAqdeia and Aqdq are explicitly mentioned in the thoughtful 
speech of the Greeks, there it has the character of primordial legend 
and is pvdoq. 



88 


The Third Directive [130-131] 


§6. The Greeks' final word concerning the hidden counter-essence of 
dAqdeia. Aqdq, (I): The concluding myth of Plato's Politeia. The myth 
of the essence of the polis. Elucidation of the essence of the de¬ 
monic. The essence of the Greek gods in the light of dAqdeia. 

The "view " of the uncanny. 


a) The noAiq. the pole of the presence of beings as determined out 
of dAqdeia. Reference to Sophocles. The reverberation of the 
conflictual essence of dAqdeia in the counter-essence to noAiq: 
dnoAiq. Reference to Burckhardt. 

The mythical presentation in Hesiod's theogony shows the provenance 
of the essence of Aqdq out of efnc, (strife) and vuf (night). And Pindar's 
ode provides the clarification of a decisive essential relation. The signless 
nebulosity of Aqdq refers to its concealment, which itself hides itself 
and thereby withdraws. This complexity of veiling and letting disappear 
manifests unequivocally enough the provenance of the essence of Aqdq. 
This provenance is nocturnal. The night veils. But the night does not 
necessarily conceal by drawing everything into the blackness of mere 
darkness. Rather, the essence of its veiling consists in this, that it rele¬ 
gates things and people and both in their relation to one another to 
the abode of a concealment. Oblivion, too, in its nocturnal essence, 
does not befall man as an individual creature so as to effectuate changes 
in his mode of representation, in consequence of which a person can 
no longer perceive certain objects. Above all, oblivion tears things and 
man away from unconcealedness, in such a manner that the one who 
forgets dwells within a realm in which beings are withdrawn and man 
himself is withdrawn from beings; and even this reciprocal withdrawal, 
as a relation, is withdrawn from unconcealedness. 

We might expect that where oblivion is experienced in this way as 
withdrawing concealment, the relation between Aqdq and dAqdeia 
would not only be mentioned immediately but would be thought ex¬ 
plicitly and assigned to meditation prior to everything else. This expecta¬ 
tion, which is precisely ours and in no way a Greek one, is not fulfilled 
Nevertheless, the reciprocal counter-essence between dAqdeia and 
Aqdq holds sway as the basic feature of beings as a whole, in the midst 
of which Greek humanity endures its history. It is almost as if what 
was always already nearby and experienced is explicitly put into words 
only in the age of the completion of Greek humanity, a completion 
that is not a high peak but instead a high pass of transition to the 
end. The Greek world comes to completion in the thinking of Plato, 
and Aristotle's thinking knows and says this completion in the most 
extreme possible manner. 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (1) [131-133] 


89 


Assuming, therefore, that in Aqdi] as the counter-essence to ccAqdeia 
the primordial opposite to "truth" holds sway, and assuming further 
that something of the essence of Being shows itself in the essence of 
this opposition, then the utterance expressing primordially dAqdeia's 
counter-essence, Aijdij, and consequently expressing dAqdaa's own es¬ 
sence, can only be a word corresponding to the character of this primor¬ 
dial utterance. And that is pvdot;. 

In the historical time of the completion of Greek thinking, i.e., in 
Plato, thoughtful utterance takes the form of "dialogue." It is as if, be¬ 
fore the end of Greek thinking, this very thinking, by its own character, 
once more wanted to speak about itself and attest to the essential rank 
the word enjoys where man stands in an immediate relation to dAqdeia. 
In Plato's dialogue "Phaedrus," in the discussion of "the beautiful" (the 
concluding part), we see in addition that Plato recognized very clearly 
the priority of the immediately spoken word over the merely written 
one. But where would Plato's "dialogues" be if they never had been 
written down themselves? 

Plato's most expansive "dialogue" in terms of content and range deals 
with the noAii;. The Romans say res publica, i.e,, res populi, i.e,, that 
which concerns the organized and established people, what is most 
their "business," Ordinarily we call this Platonic dialogue about the 
noAie, "Plato's Republic." But the difference between the modern repub¬ 
lic, the Roman res publica. and the Greek noAu; is as essential as that 
between the modern essence of truth, the Roman rectitudo, and the 
Greek dAqOna. Actually this relation already holds on account of the 
fact that the essence of the Greek noAu; is grounded in the essence 
of dAijOna. A simple reflection, even if our focus is elsewhere, must 
still lead us to suspect this connection between dAqdtia and noAu;. 
That is, if dAi'jOna as unconcealedness determines all beings in their 
presence (and that means, for the Greeks, precisely in their Being), 
then certainly the noAu; too, and it above all, has to stand within the 
domain of this determination by dAqdna, provided the noAit; does in¬ 
deed name that in which the humanity of the Greeks has the center 
of its Being, 

What is the noAic:? The word itself puts us on the right course, pro¬ 
vided we bring to it the all-illuminating Greek experience of the essence 
of Being and of truth, IIoAu; is the iioAot;. the pole, the place around 
which everything appearing to the Greeks as a being turns in a peculiar 
way The pole is the place around which all beings turn and precisely 
in such a way that in the domain of this place beings show their turning 
and their condition. 

The pole, as this place, lets beings appear in their Being and show 
the totality of their condition. The pole does not produce and does 
not create beings in their Being, but as pole it is the abode of the uncon- 



90 


The Third Directive [ 133 - 134 ] 


cealedness of beings as a whole. The noAit; is the essence of the place 
[On], or, as we say, it is the settlement [Ori-schaft] of the historical 
dwelling of Greek humanity. Because the noAiq lets the totality of beings 
come in this or that way into the unconcealedness of its condition, 
the noAiq is therefore essentially related to the Being of beings. Between 
noAiq and “Being" there is a primordial relation. 

This word noAiq is, in its root, identical with the ancient Greek word 
for "to be," neAeiv: "to emerge, to rise up into the unconcealed" (Cf 
Sophocles, Antigone, noAAa rd 6eiva ,,, neAei).' The noAiq is neither city 
nor state and definitely not the fatal mixture of these two inappropriate 
characterizations. Hence the noAiq is not the notorious "city-state" but 
is, rather, the settling of the place of the history of Greek humanity— 
neither city nor state but indeed the abode of the essence of this human¬ 
ity. This essential abode gathers originally the unity of everything which, 
as the unconcealed, comes to man and is dispensed to him as that 
to which he is assigned in his Being. The noAiq is the abode, gathered 
into itself, of the unconcealedness of beings. If now, however, as the 
word indicates, ccAqdeia possesses a conflictual essence, which appears 
also in the oppositional forms of distortion and oblivion, then in the 
noAiq as the essential abode of man there has to hold sway all the 
most extreme counter-essences, and therein all excesses, to the uncon¬ 
cealed and to beings, i.e., counter-beings in the multiplicity of their 
counter-essence. Here lies concealed the primordial ground of that fea¬ 
ture Jacob Burckhardt presented for the first time in its full bearing 
and manifoldness: the fnghtfulness, the horribleness, the atrociousness 
of the Greek noAiq. Such is the rise and the fall of man in his historical 
abode of essence— vtfJinoAiq—anoAig —far exceeding abodes, homeless, 
as Sophocles (Antigone) calls man. It is not by chance that man is spoken 
of in this way in Greek tragedy. For the possibility, and the necessity, 
of "tragedy" itself has its single source in the conflictual essence of dAq- 
deia. 

There is only Greek tragedy and no other besides it. Only the essence 
of Being as expenenced by the Greeks has this primordial character 
that "the tragic" becomes a necessity there. In the introduction to his 
lectures on the "history of Greek culture," Jacob Burckhardt knowingly 
inserts a thesis he heard as a student from his teacher in classical philol¬ 
ogy at Berlin, Bockh, and it runs as follows: "the Hellenes were more 
unhappy than most people think." Burckhardt's presentation of the 
Greeks, which he often repeated in his lectures at Basel from 1872 
on, was constructed entirely on this insight, or, rather, surmise. Nie¬ 
tzsche had in his possession an auditor's transcript of these lectures, 
and he cherished the manuscript as his most precious treasure. Thus 


1. Antigone, verse 332f ["There are 


many strange things"—TV ] 




§6 Hidden counter-essence (1) [ 134 - 136 ] 


91 


Jacob Burckhardt himself contnbuted to the fact that Nietzsche still 
thought the essence of the Greek world and of its noAiq in a Roman 
way. For Burckhardt considered the Greeks with a view toward the 
"history of Greek culture," by which he means the "history of the Greek 
spirit" (Introduction, p, 3). The concepts of "spirit" and "culture," no 
matter how they are defined, are representations belonging to modern 
thought. Burckhardt gave these representations a special stamp on the 
basis of his discovery of the "Italian Renaissance," In this way, essen¬ 
tially Roman, Romanic, and modern concepts flow into Burckhardt's 
historical thinking, Burckhardt thinks the totality of history according 
to three "forces": "state," "religion," "culture," The state is, in the mod¬ 
ern view, a power, Burckhardt agrees with the thesis of F, Chr, Schlosser, 
that "power is in itself evil," This thesis has often been repeated in 
several variations. Power is called "demonic," but no reflection is given 
to the essence of power, nor is it said what "demonic" is supposed 
to mean here. The characterization of power as "evil" and "demonic" 
is a metaphysical judgment on something undetermined in its meta¬ 
physical essence. But a discussion in these terms does not even reach 
the perimeter of the essence of the noAiq. The essence of power is foreign 
to the noAiq, with the consequence that the charactenzation of power 
as "evil" finds no ground there. The essence of power, as meant in 
modern thinking about the state, is founded in the metaphysical presup¬ 
position that the essence of truth has been transformed into certitude, 
i.e., into the self-certitude of the human being in his self-positing, and 
that this latter is based on the subjectivity of consciousness. No modern 
concept of "the political" will ever permit anyone to grasp the essence 
of the noAiq. 


b) Preparation for a detour over the path of a commentary on 
Plato's dialogue on Aqdq and the noAiq. Order: Aixq. The mortal 
course of the sojourn in the polis and the presence of beings after 
death. Christian Platonism. 

Reference to Hegel. 

Perhaps, however, dAqdeia itself casts an appropriately clarifying light 
on the essence of the ndAiq, enabling us to see why disorder and even 
disaster abound in the noAiq as the essential abode of historical man. 
These belong to the ndAiq because every unconcealment of beings 
stands in conflict with concealment and accordingly also with dissem¬ 
blance and distortion. Now, if the essence of unconcealedness and of 
concealment pervades the abode of the essence of historical man, then 
a Greek dialogue about the noAiq, assuming it is a thoughtful dialogue, 
must treat of the essence of dAqdeia. Plato does speak about dAqdeia. 
indeed in the manner of a pvdoq, at the beginning of Book VII of his 



92 


The Third Directive [ 136 - 137 ] 


dialogue on the n6Ai<;. This "myth" is known as Plato's "cave-allegory." 
Many meanings have been attributed to this "allegory," but never the 
simple and most obvious. What is at issue in this "allegory," as even 
its name suggests, is a cave, a hiding, a concealing, and also uncon¬ 
cealedness. This same Platonic dialogue on the iioAiq, which contains 
a jjvdoc; about aAqdeia, concludes, at the end of Book X, with 
another jjvdot;. The high point of this pvdoq is what it says about Aqdq 
(Plato, Politeia, X, 6I4b2-62Ib7) 

The myth of Aqdi] concluding the dialogue on the noAiq is so far- 
reaching and rich that already for that reason it cannot be presented 
here in full. Besides, any merely reportorial presentation is otiose if 
it is to take the place of a meticulous interpretation But we are lacking 
what is essential to carry out such an interpretation: an experience 
of the basic character of myth in general and of its relation to Plato's 
metaphysics. The interpretation of the individual features of this partic¬ 
ular fivdot; would only then be set in motion. So we are forced to 
make a detour. We shall limn the main features in broad strokes, with 
the intention, however, of bringing into focus the basic character of 
the whole, at least according to one aspect. This coincides with the 
question of the standing of Aqdq in the whole of the myth, i.e., to 
what extent this whole has to lead to the naming of Aqdq The whole 
of this myth is built upon, and is supported by, the entire dialogue 
on the noAiq. In the noAit, as the abode of the essence of historical 
man, the abode that discloses and conceals beings as such, man is en¬ 
compassed by everything that, in the strict sense of the word, is ordered 
to him but is thereby also withdrawn from him. We do not understand 
"ordered" here in the extrinsic sense of "added to" or "put on," but 
in the sense of "assigned," as that which is ordained to man, in such 
a way that man is delivered over to this and is ordered into it, and 
must abide in it, if his essence is to be in order What is ordered to 
man in this way, what befits man and orders him, we name with the 
single word order, in Greek: 8ixq. 

In the verses we already translated from the first fragment of Parmeni¬ 
des' didactic poem, we encountered fiixi] together with iVr'/nc If there 
we used "order" to translate the word hi'xij (which for the Greeks im¬ 
mediately resonates with du'xvvpi, to demonstrate, to indicate, and 
iiixiiv, to thrust), then "disorder" comes to mind as the obvious 
counter-word. But the "order" meant here is not the counter-essence 
to just any sort of "disorder" we might imagine. We mean "order" as 
an indicating, demonstrating, assigning, and at the same time arranging 
and "thrusting" order. It is to this that man has to be ordered, and 
so it is precisely out of it that he can err into the path ol disorder, 
especially when the assignment conceals itsell and falls away, with¬ 
drawing man from the iioAk, tearing him away from :t, so that he 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (1) [ 137 - 139 ] 


93 


becomes anoAiq. Man's emerging into order and his standing within 
order, 6ixq, is orderliness, dixaiouvvq. Orderliness is understood here 
as the unveiledness of order, its holding nothing back in secret. The 
dialogue on the noAiq has to deal with this essential abode with regard 
to what takes place in it, how man dwells in it. The theme of the Politeia 
is bixaioovvq. In concord with the orderliness of order or in discordance 
with it man can be fiixaioq, orderly, or aSixoq, disorderly. In the medita¬ 
tion on the noXiq there arises finally the question of what, for dwelling 
in the essential abode, is ordered to the orderly and the disorderly re¬ 
spectively, what, so to say, remains around each person as ordering. 

Now, dwelling in the noAiq is a sojourn here on earth, this 

sojourn in the polls, however, is in each case a nepiodoq davaiocpopoq 
(Cf. X, 6I7d7), a sight-filled path and a course traversing to the end, 
and then stepping beyond the assigned temporal span of the earthly 
sojourn. This traversing course is dovamepopoq; it harbors death and 
thereby leads to death. Yet the mortal course of man through the essen¬ 
tial place of history does not exhaust the course and the journey or, 
more generally, the Being, of man. According to Plato, this passage 
of man through a ^loq, this "course of life," is not the only one, but 
instead, after a certain time, man returns in a new form in order to 
begin a new course. The histonography of religion calls this the theory 
of "reincarnation." But we would do well, here again, to remain awhile 
within the compass of Greek thinking. And in that case we would say 
that with the completion of the current mortal course the Being of 
a man is not at an end. That is, in accordance with the essence of 
man, even after one's own death beings remain present in some fashion. 
Therefore the consideration of the noAiq arrives ultimately at the ques¬ 
tion (X, 6I4a6): 

d it\\tvii)(>a\-ia exmepo\ tttpipevn 

What remains round about each one respectively (the orderly as well 
as the unorderly) after he has finished (the mortal passage)? What sur¬ 
roundings does a man have when he is away from the here of the 
noAiq and sojourns "there," ewi? What surroundings does he have, 
where is he, before he again begins a new course? 

According to our usual, that is, in the broadest sense, "Christian," 
modes of representation, what is being raised here is the question of 
the "beyond." Christianity, from early on, following the path of Judeao- 
Hellenic teachings, has in its own way seized upon the philosophy of 
Plato and has seen to it that from then until now the Platonic philoso¬ 
phy, held out as the high point of Greek philosophy, should appear 
in the light of Christian faith. Even the thinking before Plato and Socra¬ 
tes is understood on the basis of Plato, as is evident in the ordinary 



94 


The Third Directive [ 139 - 140 ] 


designation of this thinking: it is "pre-Platonic” philosophy, its frag¬ 
ments the "fragments of the pre-Socratics." Not only does Greek philos¬ 
ophy appear in a Christian theological interpretation, but even within 
philosophy it is presented as the first stage of Christian-occidental think¬ 
ing. For the first metaphysical-historical meditations on the whole of 
the thinking of the West, namely Hegel's lectures on the history of phi¬ 
losophy, understand Greek philosophy as the stage of immediate think¬ 
ing, not yet mediated and not yet come to itself. Only this latter, certain 
of itself, in the modern sense the first "true" thinking, is actual thinking. 
Chnstianity functions here as the stage of mediation. In the wake of 
Hegel, the historiographical research of the nineteenth century adheres 
to all his basic concepts but at the same time, in a remarkable self- 
deception, rejects his "metaphysics" and flies to "Schopenhauer" and 
"Goethe"; yet even there Greek philosophy in general and the philoso¬ 
phy of Plato in particular are represented within the horizon of a Chris¬ 
tian Platonism. The same holds for Nietzsche as well, whose much- 
celebrated interpretation of the "pre-Platonic" philosophers is actually 
Platonic, i.e., Schopenhauerian, and utterly un-Greek. But what could 
be more self-evident than the conviction that the most appropriate in¬ 
terpretations of the philosophy of Plato are those approaching it with 
the aid of Platonism? Yet this procedure is comparable to the one that 
would "explain" the fresh leaf of the tree on the basis of the foliage 
fallen to the ground. A Greek interpretation of the thinking of Plato 
is the most difficult, not because this thinking contains in itself special 
obscurities and abysses, but because the following ages, and still we 
today, are inclined to rediscover immediately our own, later thinking 
in this philosophy. In the context of our leaures we must forego even 
naming the basic presuppositions of a Greek interpretation of Platonic 
thinking. The following remarks on Plato's pvdoq of Aqdq are therefore 
in this regard provisional. 


Recapitulation 


1) Politeia: the lonoq of the essence of the noXiq. The essentially 
unpolitical character of the politeia of the polis. The pole of niXeiv. 

The impossibility of interpreting the polis on the basis of the 
"state," Aixq, and iustitia. Death: transition from "here" to "there." 

Platonism. 

We are meditating on the counter-essence to dAqdeia, truth in the sense 
of unconcealedness. The primordial counter-essence to d-Aqdeia is 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) [I40-I42] 


95 


Aqdq, i.e., the signless concealment that withdraws itself as oblivion. 
The last word of the Greeks that names Aqdq in its essence is the pvdoq 
concluding Plato's dialogue on the essence of the ndAiq. 

A thoughtful dialogue always speaks of the Being of beings. A Pla¬ 
tonic dialogue on the noAiq therefore cannot be a consideration of a 
particular noAiq existing here or there. The thinker thinks the noAiq 
as such; he says what the noAiq is, what is its essence. This essence, 
what the noAiq itself is in the totality of its proper essential relations, 
i.e., what it genuinely is, is called noAneia. A thoughtful dialogue on 
the noAiq is from the very outset nothing but a dialogue about the 
noAneia. That is what the title says. But this title is still not unequivocal. 
Just as the Greek word ovcria is used in everyday language and means 
there "capital," "possessions," "goods and chattels," "estates," and just 
as at the same time the everyday word ovcria is elevated to a word 
of thoughtful speech and then comes to mean the presence of every¬ 
thing present, so noAneia means first, in the language of everydayness, 
the "life" belonging to a polis and determined by it, the dealings in 
it, and then correspondingly means the very structure of the polis in 
general, from which can then be discerned something like a "constitu¬ 
tion." This latter must not be understood as a sequence of written prop¬ 
ositions and rules, although the word pertains so originally to the "con¬ 
stitution" that what is written down does not merely present a 
subsequent "formula" or "formulation." Plato's choice of this name 
noAneia as the title of a thoughtful dialogue on the noAiq says that 
his theme will be the essential structure of the noAneia as such and 
consequently the essence of the noAic; in general. 

It has been discovered that the noAneia descnbed by Plato has never 
existed "in reality" and should therefore be called a "Utopia," some¬ 
thing that has "no place." This discovery is "correct," the only problem 
is it does not understand what it has discovered. In truth it is the insight 
that the Being of beings is "actually" nowhere within beings and is 
not, as it were, on hand as one of their parts. Accordingly, Being should 
also be a "Utopia." But in truth Being, and it alone, is precisely the 
jonoq for all beings; and Plato's Politeia is not a "Utopia" but exactly 
the opposite, namely the metaphysically determined conoq of the es¬ 
sence of the noAiq. Plato's Politeia is a recollection of the essential and 
not a plan for the factual. 

The noAiq is the essential abode of histoncal man, the "where," to 
which man as ^caov Aoyov fjov belongs, the "where" from which alone 
order is ordained to him and in which he is ordered. The noAic; is the 
"where," as which and in which order is revealed and concealed. The 
noAiq is the way the revealing and concealing of order occur such that 
in these occurrences historical man comes into his essence and espe- 



96 


The Third Directive [142-143] 


cially into his counter-esssence. Therefore we call the noAiq, wherein 
the Being of man in its relation to beings as a whole has gathered 
itself, the essential abode of historical man. Each noAnixov, everything 
"political," is always only an effect of the noAiq, i.e., of the noAneia. 
The essence of the noAiq, i.e., the noAneia, is not itself determined 
or determinable "politically." The noAiq is just as little something "politi¬ 
cal" as space itself is something spatial. The noAiq itself is only the pole 
of neAeiv, the way the Being of beings, in its disclosure and conceal¬ 
ment, disposes for itself a "where" in which the history of a human 
race is gathered. Because the Greeks are the utterly unpolitical people, 
unpolitical by essence, because their humanity is primordially and ex¬ 
clusively determined from Being itself, i.e., from dAqdeia, therefore only 
the Greeks could, and precisely had to, found the noAiq, found abodes 
for the gathering and conserving of ctAqdeia. 

The thoughtless occupation of "histonographical research" mixes to¬ 
gether essentially different epochs and civilizations of Western history, 
the Greek, Roman, medieval, modern, and contemporary in a single 
historiographical mash, and so it attains precisely the opposite of what 
it is supposed to. It intends to be a historical meditation on our own 
historical destiny. But meditation never arises from thoughtlessness. 
Histonographical research never discloses history, because such research 
is always attended by an opinion about history, an unthought one, a 
so-called obvious one, which it would like to confirm by this very re¬ 
search and in so doing only rigidifies the unthought obviousness. 

Just as impossible as is an interpretation of the noAiq on the basis 
of the modern state or the Roman res publica, so is an interpretation 
of fiixq on the basis of the modern concept of justice and the Roman 
iustitia. Aixq, understood as the order which ordains, i.e., assigns, to 
humanity its relations and comportment, takes its essence from a rela¬ 
tion to aAqdeio, but 6ixq is not determined by the noAiq or on the 
basis of a relation to the noAic;. 

Every actual noAiq occurs historically on earth ivddSe —here. Man's 
"course of life" runs through a circuit that is locally and temporally 
delimited and is a path within this circuit, a nefnoSoc;, and indeed one 
that is davavxpdfxyc;, mortal, bearing death and therefore leading to 
death. Death brings the present course to a close, but it is not the end 
of the Being of a man. Death initiates a transition from the here, IvddSe, 
to the there, exei. This transition is the beginning of a journey which 
itself again comes to a close in a transition to a new nepiodoq 
davavxpopoq. The question to raise is therefore, what would a person's 
surroundings be, what would remain for him, after he has brought 
to a close the present mortal course here on earth? 

In Christian thought, this is the question of the "beyond." For many 
reasons, the danger of a conscious or even unconscious Christian inter- 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) [143-145] 


97 


pretation of the thought of Plato is imminent. Plato's thinking entered 
through Philo very early into the Hellenic interpretation, and above 
all through Augustine into the neoplatonic Christian understanding and 
interpretation, and it has remained there ever since, throughout the 
most diverse variations. Even those who believe they are free from 
Christian representations and understand Plato in terms of humanism 
and classicism—hence presumably as "pagan"—still think in a Chris¬ 
tian way precisely insofar as the pagan is simply the counter-Christian. 
Only in terms of a Chnstian appraisal are the Greeks "pagans." But 
even completely apart from the distinction between Christian and 
pagan, Plato's philosophy is always thought of as Platonic in the sense 
of a Platonism. What could our objection be to this practice of thinking 
Plato "Platonically"? Is it not the only appropriate way, or at any rate 
more "correct" than interpreting Plato's philosophy with the help of 
the philosophy of Kant or Hegel? Nevertheless, the attempt to interpret 
Plato with the help of some sort of Platonism is certain perdition. For 
it is like trying to "explain" the fresh leaf of the tree by means of the 
foliage fallen on the ground. 


c) The question of the "here" and "there." Politeia, X, 614b2, and 
the questionableness of this "reference" to the myth. 

Plato distinguishes between evdoSe and exei: we say prudently: the 
here and the there, and we are right to leave aside the notions of 
"heaven," "hell," "limbo," "purgatory." But this is by no means suffi¬ 
cient, for the "there" of the Greeks is not only different in form and 
content but also "exists" in general in a different mode; namely, as 
a mode of the Greek experience of Being. As long as we do not reflect 
on this in an essentially fitting way, even the exei, the "there," of the 
Greeks will be a closed book. We will find ourselves helpless before 
the so-called underworld, "Hades," and the "shades" dwelling "there." 
We will then concoct some sort of "ghost psychology" and not raise 
first the simple question why are there shades there? Is the shadowy 
character of Being in Hades connected with the essence of the Greek 
experience of beings and their unconcealedness? Now assuming we 
do not remain bound to the particular and do not inquire as histonogra- 
phers of religion, then which figures dwell in the Greek "beyond" in 
place of "angels" and "devils"? But even if we are prepared to acknowl¬ 
edge that in the beyond as experienced by the Greeks not only are 
beings different, but also, prior to that. Being itself, and even if we 
have some inkling that the Greek distinction between what is here and 
what is there rests on an other experience of Being, yet we still cannot 
escape the most impelling que.stion- how can a thinker of Plato's rank 
claim to know anything at all about the "there"? 



98 


The Third Directive [145—146] 


This question of ours, apparently so smart, comes, of course, too late. 
For it is with a ^udo^that Plato answers the question of what surrounds 
those who have completed the mortal course here, i.e., the question 
of what remains in the there. At the end of the dialogue on the noAneia 
Plato has Socrates tell a story. People have often been puzzled by the 
occurrence of myths in the Platonic dialogues. The reason they turn 
up from time to time is that Plato is indeed prepared to abandon the 
primordial thinking in favor of the later so-called "metaphysics," but 
precisely this incipient metaphysical thinking still has to preserve a rec¬ 
ollection of the primordial thinking. Hence the story. 

In dialogue with Glaucon Socrates tells the concluding myth. Socrates 
begins with the words (Politeia, X, 614b2) AAA’ ov jjevroi ooi, qv 6’ 
eyci), ’AAxivov ye andAoyov ipw, ctAA’ dAxipov pev avdpoq, ‘Hpdq too 
'Appeviov, TO yevoq riapcpvAov. "But in the meantime I will not tell 
you the story selected for the entertainment of Alkinoos (the king of 
the Phaiecians) but an dnoAoyov, an apology (defense) of a brave man, 
Er, Armenios's son, one of the tnbe of Pamphyliers." 

The play on words between ov ’AAxi'vov ye dnoAoyov and dAA’ 
dAxipov pev dvdpoq cannot be rendered in the translation. This play 
on words introducing the pvdoq is not at all playful; it is supposed 
to indicate the essence of the Aoyoq about to be narrated, i.e., the es¬ 
sence of the pvdoq. This Adyoq is called dnoAoyoq. ’AnoAoyoq is used 
here in an essentially ambiguous sense, and indeed in a different verbal 
construction each time: 'AAxivov dnoAoyov and dAxipov dv6pdq 
dnoAoyov, i.e., an dnoAoyoq "for" Alkinoos versus an dnoAoyoq told 
by a brave man. In the first case, according to the meaning of its root 
dnoAeyeiv, to assort, to select, dnoAoyoq means something chosen for 
the pleasure of Alkinoos. In the second case, where it is properly meant, 
the same word dnoAoyoq means the "apology" by which the brave 
man sets apart what he says from everything else that is told and thus 
preserves it in its special truth. The words that follow do not abandon 
what they say, do not squander anything in the looseness of mere enter¬ 
tainment and non-committal chatter. The words that follow are protec¬ 
tive words resisting the importunity of ordinary explanation and, strictly 
taken, may be said and heard only in their properly essential form. 
This already establishes decisively that our "reference" to the pvdoq, 
as a mere reference, is questionable on many grounds 

"Er," the son of Armenios, had once in battle completed his life: 
6q nojE ^v noAepo) jeAevjqoaq. When, ten days afterwards, they col¬ 
lected the dead, who were already decomposed, Er was taken up as 
non-decomposed and brought home where he would be buried on the 
twelfth day. Lying on the funeral pyre, he came back to life and, as 
one who had come back, reported what he had seen "there." He said 
(614b9-cl); 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) [I46-I48] 


99 


inEiSq ov ixpijvai, r/jv nopt veodai peta noAAcjv, xai afpixveiadai 

Ofpaq eiq lonov iiva Saipovlov, 

his "soul," after it was elevated from the here, went with many (others) 
on a journey, and they arrived then at some kind of—as we say— 
"demonic" place; and there were two chasms {xaupaia —open¬ 
ings) in the earth next to one another, and there were also two others 
(openings) in the sky opposite to each other. Aixaaiai were pointing 
toward order but were sitting between these gaping openings in the 
earth and in heaven. To Er, the brave warnor, the pointing ones gave 
the task to become dyyeAov avdpcjnoiq yeveudai rcav ixei (614d2), 
a messenger to men about "the there." Hence it was necessary for him 
ctxoveiv T£ xai dedadai ndvra id ev ico lonio (614d3)—to hear as 
well as to see everything in that place, a place said to be daipovioq. 


d) V^vxq: the ground of a relation to beings. The thinker's knowledge 
of the daimonia. Reference to Aristotle and Hegel. Aaipoviov. the 
presence of the uncanny, the extraordinary, in the ordinary. The 
SaipovEq, the ones who point to and indicate what is ordinary. 

Here we need to clarify what ipvxq means and what Saipoviov means. 
Vvxq is the "soul"—that is the correct translation, just as we translate 
dAqdeia by "truth" and ipevSoq by "falsity." But in fact the word ipvxq 
cannot be translated. If we try to clarify it by saying it means the essence 
of what is alive, the question immediately anses as to how the essence 
of "life" in the Greek sense is to be thought, 'fvxq refers to the ground 
and mode of a relation to beings. A relation of the living thing to beings, 
and thereby also a relation to itself, can exist: in that case the living 
thing must have the word —Aoyov —because Being only reveals 
itself in the word. It is also possible for the relation of something alive 
to beings not to exist: the (coov, the living thing, is alive nevertheless, 
but it is then dAoyov, a living thing without the word: e.g., an 
animal or a plant. The way a living thing is posited in relation to beings 
and therewith also in relation to itself, the being-posited, thus under¬ 
stood, into the unconcealed, the position in Being of a living thing, 
that is the essence of the "soul"; it has arrived at a lonoq iii; daipdvioq. 

If we render daipovux; as "demonic," we obviously remain close to 
the word and apparently do not translate at all. In truth, it is precisely 
a "translation" when we "transport" the Greek Saipoviov into an unde¬ 
termined or half-determined representation of the "demonic." "De¬ 
mons" are for us "evil spirits"—in Christian thought, "the devil" and 
his cohorts. The demonic is then equivalent to the devilish in the sense 
of the Christian belief in, and profession of, the devil, or, on the other 
hand, in the correlated sense of an enlightened morality, where the 



100 


The Third Directive [148-149] 


"devilish" is understood as evil and evil is a violation of the principles 
of good citizenship. Such conceptions of the "demonic" will never touch 
the essence or the essential compass of the Greek Saijidviov. But as 
soon as we try to approach the essential realm of the "demonic" as 
it is experienced by the Greeks we must engage ourselves in a medita¬ 
tion which, from a pedagogical point of view, will again draw us away 
from the so-called theme of our lectures. 

Aristotle, Plato's disciple, relates at one place (Nicomachean Ethics, 
Z 7, 1141b 7ff.) the basic conception determining the Greek view on 
the essence of the thinker: xai nepiiia pev xai davpaoza ja/lf/rd 
Saipovia eiSevai aviovq (pdoiv, dxptjcna 6’ on ov id dvdpwniva 
dyadd ^qzovoiv. "It is said they (the thinkers) indeed know things 
that are excessive, and thus astounding, and thereby difficult, and hence 
in general 'demonic'—but also useless, for they are not seeking what 
is, according to straightforward popular opinion, good for man." 

The Greeks, to whom we owe the essence and name of "philosophy" 
and of the "philosopher," already knew quite well that thinkers are 
not "close to life." But only the Greeks concluded from this lack of 
closeness to life that the thinkers are then the most necessary—precisely 
in view of the essential misery of man. The Germans would not have 
had to be the people of thinkers if their thinkers had not known the 
same thing. Hegel says in the preface to the first edition of his Logic 
in 1812, "... civilized people without metaphysics" is like an "otherwise 
copiously decorated temple without the Holy of Holies."' 

The thesis quoted from Aristotle says the thinkers know Saipdvia, 
"the demonic." But how are "the philosophers," these harmless eccen- 
tnes who occupy themselves with "abstract" matters, supposed to have 
a knowledge of "the demonic"? Aaipovia is used here as an all- 
encompassing word for what is, from the point of view of the ordinary 
busy man, "excessive," "astounding," and at the same time "difficult." 
On the contrary, what is current, what a man is doing and what he 
pursues, is for the most part without difficulty for him because he can 
always find, going from one being to the next, a way of escape from 
difficulty and an explanation. The many and all too many pursue only 
the beings that are current; for them, these are real, if not precisely 
"the" reality. But in mentioning "reality," the throng attests that, besides 
what is currently real, it has something else in view, which, to be sure, 
it does not clearly see. The essence of the noWoi, the many, does not 
consist in their number and mass, but in the way "the many" comport 
themselves toward beings. They could never be busy with beings with¬ 
out having Being in view. Thus "the many" see Being and yet do not 
see it. But because they always have Being in view, although not in 


1 Hegel, WW (Verein von Freunden) Bd 3. p 4 




§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) {I49-I5II 


101 


focus, and only deal with, and calculate, and organize, beings, they 
ever find their way within beings and are there “at home” and in their 
element. Within the limits of beings, of the real, of the "facts," so highly 
acclaimed, everything is normal and ordinary. 

But where, on the contrary. Being comes into focus, there the extra¬ 
ordinary announces itself, the excessive that strays "beyond" the ordi¬ 
nary, that which is not to be explained by explanations on the basis 
of beings. This is the uncanny, literally understood and not in the other¬ 
wise usual sense according to which it rather means the immense and 
what has never yet been. For the uncanny, correctly understood, is 
neither immense nor tiny, since it is not to be measured at all with 
the measure of a so-called "standard.” The uncanny is also not what 
has never yet been present; it is what comes into presence always al¬ 
ready and in advance prior to all "uncanninesses." The uncanny, as 
the Being that shines into everything ordinary, i e., into beings, and 
that in its shining often grazes beings like the shadow of a cloud silently 
passing, has nothing in common with the monstrous or the alarming 
The uncanny is the simple, the insignificant, ungraspable by the fangs 
of the will, withdrawing itself from all artifices of calculation, because 
it surpasses all planning.' The emergence and the concealment that 
dwell in all emerging beings, i.e.. Being itself, must therefore be aston¬ 
ishing to common experience within the everyday dealing with beings, 
if this does manage to get Being actually in focus, though it always 
has some view of it. The astounding is for the Greeks the simple, the 
insignificant. Being itself The astounding, visible in the astonishing, 
is the uncanny, and it pertains so immediately to the ordinary that 
it can never be explained on the basis of the ordinary. 

Perhaps, after this exposition, we may translate lo Haipoviov ("the 
demonic”) by "the uncanny." We may indeed do so, provided we think 
the uncanny, the extraordinary, and what cannot be explained on the 
basis of the ordinary, as the result of the Soipoviox, and thus acknowl¬ 
edge that the ^aipoxiox is not the demonic because it is the uncanny, 
but that it is the uncanny precisely because it possesses the essence 
of the daipoviov The ^dipoxiov is not identical in essence with the 
uncanny in the sense just delimited, and moreover the uncanny is not 
the ground of essence of the daipoviov. What then is the Saipoviov 
itself? 

We may call the Saipcn iov {he uncanny, or the extraordinary, because 
it surrounds, and insofar as it everywhere surrounds, the present ordi¬ 
nary state of things and presents itself in everything ordinary, though 
without being the ordinary. The uncanny understood in this way is, 
with regard to what is ordinary or natural, not the excejttion but the 


1 Cl (.,rundbci\rifl'e. Gesiimtiiusflabe \Si.\ 51 




102 


The Third Directive [151-152] 


"most natural," in the sense of "nature" as thought by the Greeks, 
i.e., in the sense of (pvoiq. The uncanny is that out of which all that 
is ordinary emerges, that in which all that is ordinary is suspended 
without surmising it ever in the least, and that into which everything 
ordinary falls back. To Soipoviov is the essence and essential ground 
of the uncanny. It is what presents itself in the ordinary and takes up 
its abode therein. To present oneself in the sense of pointing and show¬ 
ing is in Greek Sai'o) {Sai'oviec; — daipoveq). 

These are not "demons" conceived as evil spirits fluttering about; 
instead, they determine in advance what is ordinary, without deriving 
from the ordinary itself They indicate the ordinary and point toward 
it. To ^aipoviov is what shows itself in pointing at what is ordinary 
and in a certain way therefore what is also present everywhere as the 
perfectly ordinary, though nevertheless never the merely ordinary. For 
those who came later and for us, to whom the primordial Greek experi¬ 
ence of Being is denied, the uncanny has to be the exception, in princi¬ 
ple explainable, to the ordinary, we put the uncanny next to the ordi¬ 
nary, but, to be sure, only as the extraordinary. For us it is difficult 
to attain the fundamental Greek experience, whereby the ordinary itself, 
and only insofar as it is the ordinary, is the uncanny. The uncanny 
appears "only" in the form of the ordinary, because the uncanny makes 
allusion to the ordinary and is in the ordinary that which alludes and 
points and has, as it were, the same character as the ordinary itself 

It is only with difficulty that we attain this simple essence of the 
6aiii6viov, since we do not experience the essence of aXqdeia. For 
the fiai'povtc;, the self-showing ones, the pointing ones, are who they 
are and are the way they are only in the essential domain of disclosure 
and of the self-disclosing of Being itself Night and day take their essence 
from what conceals and discloses itself and is self-lighting. That which 
is lighted, however, is not only what is visible and seeable, but prior 
to that—as the emerging—it is what surveys everything that comes 
into the light and stays in it and lies in it, i.e., everything normal and 
ordinary, and it is what gazes into everything ordinary, indeed in such 
a way that it precisely appears in the ordinary itself and only in it and 
out of it. 


e) The looking (deaco) that offers the sight of Being. The outward 
look (sight) of Being (eiSoc;). The Greek god (Saipcjv) that in 
looking presents itself in unconcealedness. What looks into the 
ordinary: the extraordinary, the uncanny. The appearance of the 
uncanny in human looking. 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) (152-153] 


103 


"To look" is in Greek dedo. Remarkably (or should we say amazingly?) 
only the medial form dedoiiai is known, translated as "contemplate" 
or "spectate;" whence we speak of the deaipov, the place of the specta¬ 
cle, the "theater." Thought in the Greek manner, however, dedopai 
means to provide oneself with the look, i.e., dea, in the sense of the 
sight in which something shows itself and presents itself. 0edo), "look¬ 
ing," therefore in no way means "seeing" in the sense of representa¬ 
tional looking upon and looking at, by which man turns toward beings 
as "objects" and grasps them. Oedo is rather the looking in which 
the one who looks shows himself, appears, and "is there." Qedw is 
the fundamental way the one who looks presents {dam) himself in 
the sight of his essence, i.e., emerges, as unconcealed, into the uncon¬ 
cealed. Looking, even human looking, is, originally experienced, not 
the grasping of something but the self-showing in view of which there 
first becomes possible a looking that grasps something. If man expen- 
ences looking only in terms of himself and understands looking pre¬ 
cisely "out of himself" as Ego and subject, then looking is a "subjective" 
activity directed to objects. If, however, man does not experience his 
own looking, i.e., the human look, in "reflection" on himself as the 
one who represents himself as looking, but if instead man experiences 
the look, in unreflected letting-be-encountered, as the looking at him 
of the person who is encountering him, then the look of the encounter¬ 
ing person shows itself as that in which someone awaits the other as 
counter, i.e., appears to the other and is. The looking that awaits the 
other and the human look thus experienced disclose the encountenng 
person himself in the ground of his essence. 

We moderns, or, to speak more broadly, all post-Greek humanity, 
have for a long time been so deflected that we understand looking ex¬ 
clusively as man's representational self-direction toward beings. But in 
this way looking does not at all come into sight; instead it is understood 
only as a self-accomplished "activity," i.e., an act of re-presenting. To 
re-present means here to present before oneself, to bring before oneself 
and to master, to attack things. The Greeks experience looking at first 
and properly as the way man emerges and comes into presence, with 
other beings, but as man in his essence. Thinking as moderns and there¬ 
fore insufficiently, but for us surely more understandably, we can say 
in short: the look, dea, is not looking as activity and act of the "subject" 
but is sight as the emerging of the "object" and its coming to our en¬ 
counter. Looking is self-showing and indeed that self-showing in which 
the essence of the encountering person has gathered itself and in 
which the encountering person "emerges" in the double sense that his 
essence is collected in the look, as the sum of his existence, and that 
this collectedness and simple totality of his essence opens itself to the 
look—opens itself at any rate in order to let come into presence in the 



104 The Third Directive [I53-I55] 

unconcealed at the same time the concealment and the abyss of his 
essence. 

(Looking, draox, is: to provide sight, namely the sight of the Being 
of beings, which are the looking ones themselves. Through such look¬ 
ing, man is distinguished, and he can be distinguished by it only because 
the looking which shows Being itself is not something human but be¬ 
longs to the essence of Being itself as belonging to appearance in the 
unconcealed ) 

Consequently, only if we already think, or at least seek to experience, 
the fact that "essence" and Being have for the Greeks the basic feature 
of self-disclosing, only if we think a\i]dna, are we capable of thinking 
the dtao), the look, as the basic mode of the self-showing appearance 
and essence that present themselves in what is ordinary. Only if we 
experience these simple essential states of affairs do we understand what 
otherwise is completely incomprehensible, that still at the end of the 
Greek world, namely with Plato, Being was thought in terms of the 
"sight" and the "look" in which something shows itself, in terms of 
the "countenance" that at any time "a thing" or, in general, a being 
"takes on " The "countenances" things take on, their "outward look," 
is in Greek ti6(K or ifita. Being— ifita —is what in all beings shows 
itself and what looks out through them, the precise reason man can 
grasp beings as beings at all. That which looks into all that is ordinary, 
the uncanny as showing itsell in advance, is the originally looking one 
in the eminent sense id dtdo\, i e , id driox. We translate "correctly," 
though without thinking in the Greek manner, "the divine " ()i dtoi, 
the so-called gods, the ones who look into the ordinary and who every¬ 
where look into the ordinary, are oi din'poxn,, the ones who point and 
give signs. 

Because the god is, as god, the one who looks and who looks as 
the one emerging into presence, Okhov, the god is the danov-daipcjx 
that in the look presents himself as the unconcealed. The one who 
presents himself in looking is a god, because the ground ot the uncanny. 
Being itself, possesses the essence of sell-disclosing appearance. But the 
uncanny aitpears in the ordinary and as the ordinary. The looking one 
appears in the sight and "outward look" of the ordinary, of beings 
That which within the ordinary comes to presence by his own look 
is man Therefore the sight ot the god must gather itsell within the 
ordinary, in the ambit of the essence of this human look, and must 
therein have its figure set up Man himself is that being that has the 
distinctive characteristic of being addressed by Being itself, in such a 
way that in the self-showing of man, in his looking and in his sight, 
the uncanny itself, god, appears. 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) [155—156] 


105 


Recapitulation 


2) The undemonic of the Haipovec;. The disclosing emergence of 
Being: the self-clearing. Looking (perceiving), the primordial 
mode of the emergence into the light. The intermediate position of 
the animal (Nietzsche, Spengler). Man: the looked upon. 6>co and 
ded'. the same word. Reference to Heraclitus, Fragment 48. 
Insufficient elucidation of the Greek divinities. The look as what 
is decisive for the appearance of the uncanny within the ordinary. 
The uncanny as showing itself within the ordinary, and its 
relation, founded on Being, to the divinities. 

The myth that concludes Plato's dialogue on the essence of the ii6\ic, 
and that also, in another sense, first opens up the dialogue, itself con¬ 
cludes with an account of the essence of \ij0i], the counter-essence 
to d\i']dna This account is the story ot the warrior "Er" Having com¬ 
pleted in battle his life "here," he began "there," with many others, 
the passage which must be undergone betore a human being, after a 
new decision, begins again a new course "here." The warrior is given 
the task of looking at the route "there" and at the places traveled 
through, and as a messenger (('<}}< loc) he is then to report to men 
"here." 

The essence ot the places, their co-appurtenance and their scMjuence 
in the "there," i e , the entire district ot the "there," is a idiioc 
hdipoMoc- Now since, as will be shown, \i\di] is the most extreme 
and the ultimate place in this "demonic" district, wc have to arrive 
at a clear understanding of what is meant by (ictijjaxiox in Greek 
thought both in this case and in general in order to grasp the all¬ 
determining locational character of 1/yiV/y. Our common, contused, and 
murky representations of the "demonic" do not at all help clarify the 
essence of the hatpdxun On the other hand, our exposition has to 
remain within the limits of a mere allusion. It will therefore not be 
successful in obviating all misunderstandings 

By way of preparation, we note that the uncanny, or the extraordi¬ 
nary, shines throughout the familiar ambit of the beings we deal with 
and know, beings we call ordinary. Thereby we uiulerstand "the un¬ 
canny" altogether "literally." We are divesting from the word any repre¬ 
sentation of the gigantic, the overpowering, the exaggerated, the weird 
Of course, the uncanny can also, in its excessiveness, hide behind such 
figures But it itself in its essence is the inconspicuous, the simple, the 
insignificant, which nevertheless shines in all beings. If we exmeeive 
the uncanny as the simple which shines into the ordinary, and which 



106 


The Third Directive (156-158] 


does not stem from the ordinary, but which nevertheless appears in 
advance in all that is ordinary, shining through it and around it, then 
it is clear that the word "uncanny," as used here, has nothing at all 
in common with its banal sense as "impressive" and "moving." In the 
present context, the uncanny is to be thought as bearing no trace of 
the word's other meanings 

Yet what we are calling the "uncanny" we still grasp on the basis 
of the ordinary. What the so-called uncanny is in itself and what first 
admits of the character of the uncanny as its consequence, that is based 
on the shining into beings, on self-presentation, in Greek. haUo. 

What shines into beings, though can never be explained on the basis 
of beings nor constructed out of beings, is Being itself And Being, shin¬ 
ing into beings, is id Safo\ — Safpo\. Descending from Being into be¬ 
ings, and thus pointing into beings, are the daioviec; — Sai'povtc;. The 
"demons," so understood, arc altogether "undcmonic": that is, judged 
in terms of our usual murky representation of the "demonic." But these 
undemonic Sai'povec; arc anything but "harmless" and "incidental." 
They are not casual additions to beings, which man could bypass with 
no loss of his own essence and could leave aside and could consider 
solely according to his whims and needs In consequence of this incon¬ 
spicuous unsurpassability, the daipovec; are more "demonic" than "de¬ 
mons" in the usual sense could ever be The daipovfc; arc more essential 
than any being. They not only dispose the "demonic demons" into the 
disposition of the horrible and frightful, but they determine every essen¬ 
tial affective disposition from respect and joy to mourning and terror. 
Here, to be sure, these "affective dispositions" arc not to be understood 
in the modern subjective sense as "psychic states" but arc to be thought 
more originarily as the attunements to which the silent voice of the 
word attunes the essence of man in its relation to Being. 

We who have come so late, however, can only experience the essence 
of the daipovt'c, as shining into the ordinary and presenting themselves 
in beings and in that way pointing beings toward Being, on the condi¬ 
tion that we attain at least an incipient relation to the essence of dAq- 
dt'ia, and thereby rccogni/.e that, for the Greeks, disclosure and emer¬ 
gence prevail in the essence of every originarily emergent being Insofar 
as Being comes into presence out of oAqdno, there belongs to it self¬ 
disclosing emergence. We name this the self-opening and the clearing 
(cf Being and Time). These names originate indeed from an cxj)criencc 
of primordial thinking, for which dAqdtia must be thought according 
to its own properly perceived "truth." These other names, which here 
come to words unwittingly, as it were, do not consist in a mere substitu¬ 
tion of designations for something that remains thought in the same 
way. What is cleared shows itself originally in the transparency of the 
diaphanous, i.e., as the bright and the clear Only insofar as dAqdeia 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) [I58-I59[ 


107 


abides, does it bring the clearing into the unconcealed Because the 
clearing occurs in the concealed essence of ccAijdfia, we experience 
emergence and presence, i.e.. Being, "in the light" of the bright and 
of the "light " Luminous self-disclosure shows itself as the shining (The 
sun shines.) What shines is what shows itself to a looking. What appears 
to the looking is the sight that solicits man and addresses him, the look. 
The looking performed by man in relation to the appearing look is 
already a response to the original look, which first elevates human look¬ 
ing into its essence. Thus as a consequence of the abiding of d.\i']di ia, 
and only because of it, looking is the primordial way of emergence 
into the light and coming into the light, i e , shining into the uncon¬ 
cealed To be sure, we must understand looking in the original Greek 
manner as the way a man encounters us by looking at us and, in look¬ 
ing, gathers himself into this self-opening emergence, and therein, with¬ 
out holding back a remainder, presents his essence and lets it "emerge." 

This looking, which lirst makes presence possible, is therefore more 
original than the presence of things, because the self-disclosing look, 
according to the full essence of disclosure, at the same time shelters 
and hides something undisclosed. The thing, on the contrary, lacking 
the look, appears only in such a way that it stands in the unconcealed 
but itself has nothing to disclose and consequently also nothing to hide. 

Here the animal has a peculiar intermediate position Animals are 
said to "watch" us But animals do not look The "peering," or "glar¬ 
ing," or "gawking" and "gaping" of an animal is never a sell-disclosure 
of Being, and, in its so-called looking, the animal never produces a 
self-emergence in a being that is disclosed to it. We are always the 
ones who lirst take up into the unconcealed such "looking" and who, 
on our own, interpret the way animals "watch" us as a looking On 
the other hand, where man only experiences Being and the uncon¬ 
cealed sketchily, the animal's "look" can concentrate in itself a special 
power of encounter. Looking, in the original sense of emergent self- 
presenting, i e., determined trom d\i']i)u(i, is in Greek ikdo). On the 
other hand, looking in the sense of grasping, which is understood on 
the basis of the grasped and lets the encountering look come to itself 
and accepts it—this grasping look is expressed through the medial form 
Oedo) in the word Oniopai, to let the encountering look come to itself, 
i.e., to behold The Greeks were acquainted with the grasping look, 
just as, conversely, in addition to such looking as an act of subjective 
representation, we also know the look of encounter. But the question 
is not whether both these essential forms of looking, the encountering 
and the grasping, are known or not. The issue is which one, the look 
of emerging into presence or the look of grasping, has the essential 
priority in the interpretation of appearances and on what basis this 
rank is determined. According to the priority of subjectivity in the mod- 



108 


The Third Directive [I59-I6I[ 


ern period, looking as an act of the subject is decisive. Insofar as, in 
Nietzsche's terms, man is the animal identified as the superman, the 
animal that has its essence in the will to power, the look of the subject 
is the look of a being that advances by calculating, i.e,, by conquering, 
outwitting, and attacking The look of the modern subject is, as Spengler 
said, following Nietzsche, the look of the predatory animal: glaring. 

The Greeks too experienced the look as an activity of man. But the 
basic feature of this grasping look is not glaring, by means of which 
beings are, so to say, impaled and become in this way first and foremost 
objects of conquest. For the Greeks, looking is the "perception" 
["Vernehmen"] of beings on the basis of a primordial consent 
[Einvernehmen] given to Being, which is why the Greeks do not even 
know the concept of object and never think Being as objectivity. The 
Greeks experience the grasping look as perception, because this look 
is determined originally on the basis of the encountering look Within 
the domain of the essence of a.\i']dFia, this latter has the priority In 
the ambit of this primordial look, man is "only" the looked upon. This 
"only," however, is so essential that man, precisely as the looked upon, 
is first received and taken up into the relation of Being to himself and 
is thus led to perception. What looks is what looks into unconcealed¬ 
ness; TO deaov is id dnov. We translate the latter correctly but thought¬ 
lessly, and presumptuously though emptily, as "the divine " (^hdoviec; 
are the ones who look into the unconcealed, (dia, the look, as the 
essence of emergent existence, and did, goddess, are one and the same 
"word," considering the Greeks did not use accent marks in their writ¬ 
ing and, above all, recognizing the original attentiveness the Greeks 
displayed for the essential homophony of words and hence for the hid¬ 
den ambiguity of their expression. In this regard, think, for example, 
of Heraclitus Fragment 48; 


ju) om id(;(0 d\o\a fiJiK di dmaiot,. 

"The proper name for bow is (hl'k ,"—the bow means and "is" in Greek 
existence (the) "life" (not as "biological" but as fateful life-course), 
what it produces, however, is "death." Bioc; is ambiguous From the 
bow there emerges and arises the flight and the course of the arrow 
But the "bow," which thus lets arise, may also bring down. 'Ovopo 
is the name, the word that expresses, not mere noise and sound. The 
word fiuK is in itself ambiguous and expresses in such ambiguity pre¬ 
cisely the essence of death-bringing life. The Greeks hear Oia — ded 
just as they hear fiioq—fiuK (rhoi, so-called "gods," as the ones who 
look into the unconcealed and thereby give a sign, are dedoviiq, are 
by essence daiovitK — dai'poMt;, the uncanny ones who present them- 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (1) {I6I-I62{ 


109 


selves in the ordinary. Both words, i%d()vn(; and daun express the 
same thing, if thought of essentially. But the usual meaning of the 
names dcofand haipovn, (“gods and demons") no longer signifies the 
origin they express Often what a word expresses is distorted and sup¬ 
pressed by its "meanings." 

The ones who shine into the ordinary appear in this ordinary as 
something ordinary. The looking ones are present as ones who look 
into the ordinary, i,e., as men in the form of men. In what is ordinary, 
man appears as one who is present by way of looking. The animal, 
too, in a certain sense appears that way, which is why at the outset 
the divine also has the form of the animal. But precisely this circum¬ 
stance testifies that neither the "animal" as such nor the "man" as such, 
but instead their look, is what is decisive for the appearance of the 
uncanny. Thus the gods appear in the form of man not because they 
are thought of as "human" and are anthropomorphized, but because 
the Greeks experience man as the being whose Being is determined 
through a relation of self-disclosing Being itself to what, on the basis 
of this very relation, we call "man." Therefore the look of the god who 
stems from Being can emerge "in" man and can look out from the 
form of "man" as gathered in the look. Therefore men are often divi¬ 
nized and thought of according to a divine form, since gods and men 
receive their respective distinct essence from Being itself, i.e , from «!/)- 
del a. 

The "anthropomorphic" and the "theomorphie" precepts of the mod¬ 
ern "explanation" of the Greek gods are erroneous in every ease This 
"explanation," that the gods are deprived of divine attributes according 
to the measure of man, and that men are unhumanly divinized, is essen¬ 
tially erroneous, since it relates to a way of questioning that is mistaken 
already in the raising of the question and must wander around in error, 
for the essential domain of which alone elucidates everything, 

is not acknowledged or experienced It is not in the reign of the individ¬ 
ual gods that the divinities of the Greeks display the astonishing and 
the demonic in the true sense, but that is grounded in the provenance 
of their essence. 

It may indeed be obvious that the Greek gods, who arc no more, 
remain experienceable on the basis of Being as thought by the Greeks. 
Yet we do not think the Being which is to be expressed here, and we 
do not in advance reflect on it, but instead, in our usual haste, according 
to our pleasure or fancy, or quite thoughtlessly, we presuppose some 
idea of Being that is not experienced in a decisive manner and is not 
correspondingly elucidated. In this way again and again the most facile 
precept imposes itself, that these divinities must be explained as a "prod¬ 
uct of man" or more particularly of "religious" man As if this man. 



110 


The Third Directive [I62-I64[ 


even for a moment, could have been man without the relation of these 
divinities to his own essence, i,e., without the abiding of this very rela¬ 
tion in Being itself 

f) The difference between the Greek gods and the Christian God. 
The word as naming Being in its looking-into, and myth as a 
mode of the relation to appearing Being. Man: the God-sayer. 

"Decline" of cultures (Nietzsche, Spengler). The basic character of 
the oblivion of being: A-theism. 

The Greeks neither fashioned the gods in human form nor did they 
divinize man. The essence of the Greek gods cannot be explained as 
an "anthropomorphism," no more than the essence of Greek man can 
be thought as a "theomorphism." The Greeks neither humanized the 
gods nor divinized man; quite to the contrary, they experienced the 
gods and men in their distinct essence, and in their reciprocal relation, 
on the basis of the essence of Being in the sense of self-disclosing emer¬ 
gence, i e., in the sense of looking and pointing. That is why only the 
Greeks have a clear knowledge of the essence of the "demigods," 
qpi'dfoi, who dwell in the between, between the gods and men. 

The "anthropomorphic" conception of the Greek gods and the "theo- 
morphic" conception of Greek men, who have neither humanized nor 
anthropomorphized god nor divinized themselves into gods, are equally 
groundless answers to deficient questions To ask whether the Greeks 
anthropomorphized the "divine persons" or divinized human person¬ 
alities into divine persons is to inquire into the "person" and 
"personalities"—without having determined in advance, even provi¬ 
sionally, the essence of man and of the divinities as experienced by 
the Greeks and without giving a thought to what is in fact first, namely 
that for the Greeks no more than there are "subjects" arc there "per¬ 
sons" and "personalities." And how could even the slightest thing about 
an "anthropo-morphy" or about a "thco-morphy" be determined with¬ 
out the foundation of the essence of pofxpi] as experienced by the 
Greeks and the essence of the Greek concepts of "forming," "becom¬ 
ing," and "being"? And how could that be gained unless, in advance 
of everything, the essence of aAijdtia were better known? 

The fundamental essence of the Greek divinities, in distinction to 
all others, even the Christian God, consists in their origination out of 
the "presence" of "present" Being. And that is also the reason why 
the strife between the "new," i.e,, the Olympic, gods and the "old" 
ones is the battle, occurring in the essence ot Being, that determines 
the upsurge of Being itself into the emergence of its essence This essen¬ 
tial nexus is the reason the Greek gods, just like men, are powerless 
before de.stiny and against it. \toif)a holds sway over the gods and 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (1) [I64^I65[ 111 

men, whereas in Christian thought, e.g,, all destiny is the work of the 
divine "providence" of the creator and redeemer, who as creator also 
dominates and calculates all beings as the created. And so Leibniz can 
still say: cum Deus calculat, fit mundus —"because and while (iod calcu¬ 
lates, the world arises," The Greek gods are not "personalities" or "per¬ 
sons" that dominate Being, they are Being itself as looking into beings. 
But because Being always and everywhere infinitely exceeds all beings 
and juts forth in beings, therefore where the essence of Being has come 
originarily into the unconcealed, as is the case with the Greeks, the 
gods are more "excessive" or, spoken in the Christian and modern way, 
more "ethereal" and more "spiritual," despite their "human (|ualities." 
Precisely because the "gods" are daifoxn, —i%dovTc^and appear along 
with the appearance ol the familiar and ordinary, their uncanniness 
is so pure in measure and in mildness that when they appear aiScoq 
and \df)ut —awe and favor of Being—shine everywhere in advance, 
pointing while shining, and attuning while pointing. Although we are 
thinking the essence of the Greek gods more originarily il we call them 
the attuning ones, we should indeed name them this wa\ since awe 
and favor and brilliance of mildness belong to Being, and these are 
experienced poetically in (lidcf and \dpii; and thoughtlully in 
davpaoiox and daipdviov From this attuning and pointing light stems 
the brilliance of dnox, the shining. Precisely this brilliance secured for 
the Greeks at the same time an experience ol the dark and ol the empty 
and of the gaping Whereas the low-German word "Got” signilies, ac¬ 
cording to its Indo-European root, a being man invokes and hence is 
the invoked one, the Greek names lor what we call "God" [G'e//| express 
something essentially dilferent ftdc —dtdov and Saifcox—daicov 
mean the self-emergent looking one and Being as entering into beings. 
Here God and the gods, already by the very name, are not seen Irom 
the standpoint ol man, as invoked by man And when the gods are 
in fact invoked, e g , in the ancient formulas ol oaths, there they are 
called (>vxioi()f)K;, the ones who "see" and have seen and as such have 
beings in unconcealedness and can therefore point to them. But 
ovxunofnx are not "witnesses," since bearing witness, as long as we 
do not understand it originarily as bringing about (the look), is already 
founded on the having seen ol the seer The gods, as dydoviix,, are 
necessarily loiof)^; 'Iinopia means "to bring into view" (from the stem 
fid: x’idere, visio), to place in the light, in the brightness It is therefore 
that the unofytn claims, properly and lirst, the ray of light. See Aeschy¬ 
lus, Acfamemnon, bib, where it is said of Menelaus: ti yovx in, dxiic 
t]Mov XIV loiopti —if still any ray of the sun has him in sight, i e., lets 
him be visible and stand in the light 

Yet the name and the designation ol the divinity ( ihfox) as the looking 
one and the one who shines into ( ihdox) is not a mere vocal expression 



112 


The Third Directive //65-/67/ 


The name as the first word lets what is designated appear in its primor¬ 
dial presence The essence of man, as experienced by the Greeks, is 
determined on the basis of his relation to self-emergent Being, so that 
man is the one who has the word. And the word is in essence the 
letting appear of Being by naming, Man is the .Idyov fjov—the 
being that emerges by naming and saying and that in saying maintains 
its essence. The word as the naming of Being, the fivdot;, names Being 
in its primordial looking-into and shining—names to dtfov, i,e,, the 
gods. Since to deiov and id daifioviov (the divine) are the uncanny 
that look into the unconcealed and present themselves in the ordinary, 
therefore fivdoi; is the only appropriate mode of the relation to appear¬ 
ing Being, since the essence of pvdot; is determined, just as essentially 
as are dtiov and Saifidviov, on the basis of disclosedness It is therefore 
that the divine, as the appearing and as what is perceived in the appear¬ 
ing, is that which is to be said, and is what is said in legend. And 
it is therefore that the divine is the "mythical," And it is therefore that 
the legend of the gods is "myth " And it is therefore that man in the 
Greek experience, and only he, is in his essence and according to the 
e,ssence of d.\i']dna the god-sayer. Why this holds can only be under¬ 
stood and thought on the basis of the essence of dAqdna, imsofar as 
the latter prevails in advance throughout the essence of Being itself, 
throughout the essence of divinity and the essence of humanity, and 
throughout the essence of the relation of Being to man and of man 
to beings. 

But what ii precisely this essence of dAqdna, and with it the primor¬ 
dial self-manife,sting e,ssence of Being, are distorted by transformations 
and because of such distortion are ultimately prey to concealment in 
the sense of oblivion^ What if the essence of Being and the essence 
of truth are forgotten? What if the oblivion of Being invisibly and sign- 
lessly surrounds with error the history of historical humanity? If the 
originary divinity emerges on the basis of the essence of Being, should 
the oblivion of Being not be the ground for the fact that the origin 
of the truth of Being has withdrawn itself into concealedne,ss ever since, 
and no god could then appear emerging out of Being itself? 

"A-theism," correctly understood as the absence of the gods, has 
been, since the decline of the Greek world, the oblivion of Being that 
has overpowered the history of the West as the basic feature of this 
history itself "A-theism," understood in the sense of essential history, 
is by no means, as people like to think, a product of freethinkers gone 
berserk, "A-theism" is not the ",standpoint" of "philosophers" in their 
proud posturing Furthermore, "a-theism" is not the lamentable prod¬ 
uct of the machinations of "freemasons," "Atheists" of such a kind are 
themselves already the last dregs of the absence of the gods. 

But how is an appearance of the divine at all suppo,sed to be able 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) //67-/6S/ 


113 


to find the region of its essence, i e,, its unconcealedness, if, and as 
long as, the essence of Being is forgotten and, on the basis of this forgot¬ 
tenness, the unacknowledged oblivion of Being is elevated to a principle 
of explanation for every being, as occurs in all metaphysics? 

Only when Being and the essence of truth come into recollection 
out of oblivion will Western man secure the most preliminary precondi¬ 
tion for what is the most preliminary of all that is preliminary: that 
is, an experience of the essence of Being as the domain in which a 
decision about the gods or the absence of the gods can first be prepared. 
But we will not recollect Being itself and its essence as long as we 
do not experience the history of the essence of truth as the basic feature 
of our history, as long as we calculate history only “historiographically." 
For it is also a historiographical calculation when we come to know 
the Greek world as something of the past and establish that it has "de¬ 
clined," a constatation mostly made in the "historiographical" form of 
saying that Hellenism would contain for us "eternal values " As if essen¬ 
tial history could be something allowing itself to be exploited for values! 
The obeisance before the "eternal values" of past cultures is the basic 
form in which historiographers take leave of history without experienc¬ 
ing it at all and destroy all sense for tradition and dialogue 

But if we continue to speak of peoples who have "declined" and 
the "declined" Greek world, what then do we know ol the essence 
of historical decline? What if the decline of the Greek world were that 
event by which the primordial essence of Being and of truth would 
be secured back in its own concealedness and thereby first become fu- 
tural? What if "decline" would not be end but beginning? Every Greek 
tragedy narrates the decline. Every one of these declines is a beginning 
and dawning of the essential. When Spengler, wholly on the heels of 
Nietzsche's metaphysics and coarsening it everywhere and leveling it 
down, speaks of the "decline of the West," he is not at all speaking 
of history. Eor he has already in advance devalued history to a "biologi¬ 
cal process" and made out of history a greenhouse of "cultures" that 
grow and fade away like plants. Spengler thinks history, if he thinks 
at all, in a hi.story-less way. He understands "decline" in the sense of 
mere coming to an end, i e., as biologically represented perishing. Ani¬ 
mals "decline," they perish History declines in.sofar as it falls back into 
the concealedne.ss of its beginning—i e., it does not decline in the sense 
of perish, because it can never "decline" that way If, in order to eluci¬ 
date the haiiioviov, we point here at the essence of the Greek divinities, 
then we have in mind not antiquated things, or the objects of historiog¬ 
raphy, but history. And history is the event of the essential decision 
about the essence of truth, which event is always a coming one and 
never something past In forgetting, however, we are subservient to 
the past in the most dire way. 



114 


The Third Directive II68-I70I 


g) The divine as it enters into the unconcealed. The daimonion: 
the look in its silent reception into the appurtenance to Being. The 
disclosive domain of the word. The "correspondence" of the divine 
and legend-ary (to deiov and d {ivdoq). The setting into work (art) 
of unconcealedness and its medium of word and myth. 

EvSaipovi'a and Saipovioc; lonoq. 

If we leave behind the oblivion of Being, insofar as we can now do 
so and insofar as we can at all do so by our own initiative, and if 
we think the primordial essence of Being, i.e,, dAijdeia, and if we think 
of ccAqdaa in such a way that we arc thinking its essence still more 
primordially, then we will experience the demonic in the sense of the 
Greek Saifioviov. 

The Saipoviov is the essential character of the which, as the 

looking one, looks into what is normal and ordinary, i c,, appears in 
it This appearing is in itself haiov, the divine as entering into the uncon¬ 
cealed, What enters into the unconcealed and appears there has as basic 
modes of appearance looking and saying, whereby we must note that 
the essence of saying docs not consist in vocal sound but in the voice 
[Stimme] in the sense of soundless attuning [Stimmenden], signaling, 
and bringing the essence of man to itself, bringing it, namely, into its 
historical destiny [Bestimmung] in its way of being the "there," i.e,, 
as the ecstatic clearing of Being (sec Being and Time, §§ 28ff), The 
look in its silent reception into the sclf-perceiving-gathcring appurte¬ 
nance to Being is the daifioviov. This "claim" of the divine, grounded 
in Being itself, is taken up by man into dictum and legend, because 
the disclosure of the unconcealed and the securing of the disclosed takes 
place first, and only, in speech. 

Sight into the unconcealed transpires lirst, and only, in the disclosive 
word Sight looks, and is the appearing self-showing that it is, only 
in the disclosive domain of the word and of telling perception. Only 
if we rccogni/c the original relation between the word and the essence 
of Being will we be capable of grasping why, for the Greeks and only 
for them, to the divine (id Onov) must correspond the legendary (d 
pvdog). This correspondence is indeed the primordial essence of all 
analogy (homology), the word "ana-logy" taken essentially and liter¬ 
ally, Insight into this analogy, in which a dictum, a word, a legend, 
corresponds to Being, i.e,, discloses it by speaking of it as the same 
in a comparison, puts us into a position to finally provide the answer 
to an earlier question 

In our first elucidation of the essence of fivdoi, as the disclosive legend 
in which and for which Being appears, we asserted that, in accord with 
the essential dignity of the word, poetizing and thinking had the highest 
rank for the Greeks This claim was bound to provoke an objection. 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) II70-I7II 


115 


and the foregoing elucidations ol haijiaviov and deiov have lent it still 
more significance. For the Greeks, beings appear in their Being and 
in their “essence" not only in the "word" but equally in sculpture. 
If indeed the divine in the Greek sease, m is precisely Being 

itself looking into the ordinary, and if the divine essence appears pre¬ 
cisely for the Greeks in the architecture of their temples and in the 
sculpture of their statues, what happens then to the asserted priority 
of the word and accordingly to the priority of poetizing and thinking? 
For the Greeks, are not architecture and sculpture, exactly with regard 
to the divine, of a higher rank, or at least of the same rank, as poetry 
and thinking? Is there not a well-justified ground to our readily-adopted 
procedure of forming our standard "historiographical picture" of the 
essence of the Greek world on the basis of architecture and sculpture? 
Here we will only be able to raise and clarify these far-reaching ques¬ 
tions within the limits drawn by our meditation on the essence of the 
Saifioviuv. 

It is easy to see that at issue here are the relations among the "classes 
of art" and their rank architecture, sculpture, poetry. We are thinking 
of the essence of art here, and indeed not in general and vaguely, and 
to be sure not as an "expression" of culture or as a "witness" to the 
creative potential of man. Our focus is how the work of art itself lets 
Being appear and brings Being into unconcealedness. This kind of ques¬ 
tioning is far removed from metaphysical thinking about art, for the 
latter thinks "aesthetically," That means the work is considered with 
regard to its effect on man and on his lived experience To the extent 
that the work itself comes to be considered, it is looked upon as the 
product of a creating, a "creating" which again expresses a "lived urge," 
Thus even if the work of art is considered for itself, it is taken as the 
"object" or "product" of a creative or imitative lived experience, that 
is to say, it is conceived constantly on the basis of human subjective 
perception (a'lodqoii;). The aesthetic consideration of art and of the 
work of art commences precisely (by essential necessity) with the incep¬ 
tion of metaphysics. That means the aesthetic attitude toward art begins 
at the moment the essence of dAijdna is transformed into diioicoaic;, 
into the conformity and correctness of perceiving, presenting, and repre¬ 
senting, This transformation starts in Plato's metaphysics. In the time 
before Plato, for essential reasons, a consideration "of" art did not exist, 
and so in general all Western considerations of art and all explications 
of art and historiography of art from Plato to Nietzsche are "aesthetic," 
This metaphysical basic fact of the unbroken domination of aesthetics 
is not changed at all, provided we keep the metaphysical in mind, if 
instead of a so-called cultivated and snobbish "aesthete," we have, e,g,, 
a peasant, with his "natural" instinct, "experience" a nude in an art 
exhibit. The peasant, too, is an "aesthete," 



116 


The Third Directive II7I-I73I 


Thinking about this unshakable fact, the suspicion must arise in us, 
after all we have been saying, that in our present desire to determine 
something about the art of the Greeks the obviousness of the aesthetic 
mode of consideration might in advance be burdening our approach 
with improper and distorting points of view. 

According to the usual opinion, there are different "classes" of art. 
Art itself is the forming and shaping and "creating" of a work out of 
some matter. Architecture and sculpture use stone, wood, steel, paint; 
music uses tones, poetry words One might agree that for the Greeks 
the poetic presentation of the essence of the gods and of their dominion 
was certainly essential; yet no less essential and in fact more "impres¬ 
sive," because of its visibility, would be the presentation of the gods 
immediately in statues and temples. Architecture and sculpture use as 
their matter the relatively stable material of wood, stone, steel. They 
are independent of the lleeting breath of the quickly fading and, more¬ 
over, ambiguous word. Hence through these classes of art, architecture, 
sculpture, and painting, essential limits are set for poetry. The former 
do not need the word, while the latter does. 

Now, this view is quite erroneous. Indeed architecture and sculpture 
do not use the word as their matter. But how could there ever be tem¬ 
ples or statues, existing for what they are, without the word? Certainly 
these works have no need for the descriptions of the historiography 
of art. The Greeks were fortunate in not yet needing historiographers 
of art, or of literature, music, and philosophy, and their written history 
is essentially different from modern "historiography," The Greeks had 
more than enough just with the tasks given them by poetry, thinking, 
building, and sculpturing. 

But the circumstance that in a temple or in a statue of Apollo there 
are no words as material to be worked upon and "formed" by no means 
proves that these "works," in what they are and how they are, do not 
still need the word in an essential way. The essence of the word does 
not at all consist in its vocal sound, nor in loquacity and noise, and 
not in its merely technical function in the communication of informa¬ 
tion The statue and the temple stand in silent dialogue with man in 
the unconcealed. If there were not the silent word, then the looking 
god as sight of the statue and of the features of its ligure could never 
appear. And a temple could never, without standing in the disclosive 
domain of the word, present itself as the house of a god The fact that 
the Greeks did not describe and talk about their "works of art" "aesthet¬ 
ically" bears witness to the fact that these works stood well secured 
in the clarity of the word, without which a column would not be a 
column, a tympanum a tympanum, a frieze a frieze. 

In an es,sentially unique way, through their poetizing and thinking, 
the Greeks experience Being in the disclosiveness of legend and word. 



§6 Hidden counter-essence (I) 1173-1741 


117 


And only therefore do their architecture and sculpture display the nobil¬ 
ity of the built and the shaped. These "works" exist only in the medium 
of the word, i.e,, in the medium of the essentially telling word, in the 
realm of the legendary, in the realm of "myth," 

It is therefore that poetizing and thinking have a priority, one which 
to be sure is not grasped if we represent it "aesthetically" as a priority 
of one class of art over others. Similarly, in general art is not the object 
of a "cultural" or lived drive but is the setting into work of the uncon¬ 
cealedness of Being out of the holding sway of Being itself 

In pvdoq the Saipoviov appears. Just as the word and "having the 
word" sustain the essence of man, i.e,, the relation of Being to man, 
so in the same range of essence, i.e,, in relation to the whole of beings, 
the ^aipdviov determines the ba.sic relation of Being to man. Therefore 
in later Greek antiquity, with Plato and Aristotle, a word was still essen¬ 
tial, one that named this relation of Being to man That word is 
evdaipoxia. 

Through the Roman-Christian translation as beatitude (i.e,, the .state 
of the beatus, the blessed one) evSaifiovia was, of course, transformed 
into a mere quality of the human soul, "happiness," But FuSaipovia 
means the holding sway in the appropriate measure of the "fi3"—the 
appearing and coming into presence of the Saifioviov 

This is not a "spirit" dwelling somewhere within the breast The 
Socratic-Platonic talk of the daiiioviov as an inner voice signihes only 
that its attuning and determining do not come from the outside, i.e., 
from some being at hand, but from invisible and ungraspable Being 
itself which is closer to man than any obtrusive manipulatable being. 

Where the Saiiioviov, the divine which enters into unconcealedness, 
the uncanny, must be said explicitly, there the saying is a legend, a 
fivdot;. The conclusion of the Platonic dialogue on the essence of the 
noAu; speaks of a Saifioviot; lonoc,. We now understand what this name 
means, 

lYmoq is the Greek for "place," although not as mere position in 
a manifold of points, everywhere homogeneous The essence of the 
place consists in holding gathered, as the present "where," the circum¬ 
ference of what is in its nexus, what pertains to it and is "of' it, of 
the place The place is the originally gathering holding of what belongs 
together and is thus for the most part a manifold of places reciprocally 
related by belonging together, which we call a settlement or a district 
[Ortschaft], In the extended domain of the district there are thus roads, 
passages, and paths, A daiiiovioq loiiot; is an "uncanny district," That 
now means: a "where" in whose squares and alleys the uncanny shines 
explicitly and the essence of Being comes to presence in an eminent 
sense. 



118 


The Third Directive 1175—1761 


§7. The Greeks' final word concerning the hidden counter-essence of 
dAndaa, Andn (JI). The concluding myth of Plato's Politeia. 

The field of Aqdq. 


a) The district of the uncanny: the field of withdrawing 
concealment. The exclusiveness of the uncanny in the place of 
lethe. The sight of its emptiness, and the nothingness of the 
withdrawal. The uncontainable water of the river "Carefree" in the 
field of Aqdq. The saving of the unconcealed by thoughtful 
thinking; the drink of the thinker. 

The district mentioned in the concluding myth of Plato's Politeia is nei¬ 
ther on "earth" nor in "heaven," Quite to the contrary, in this district 
there are such things, and only such things, which point to the subter- 
restrial, the supraterrestrial, and to what pertains to the earth. The sub¬ 
terrestrial and the supraterrestrial are the places whence the "demonic" 
shines up upon, or down upon, the earth. They are the places of the 
gods. In the district of the uncanny the ones who come from the subter¬ 
restrial and the supraterrestrial meet in order to wander through this 
daqiovioc; jonoq before they again go through a new mortal course 
on earth. In wandering through the district of the uncanny, its places 
must be traversed according to explicitly delimited stops and times. 
The last place within the district of the uncanny, consequently the 
one at which the wanderer must stop immediately prior to the transition 
to a new mortal course, is to rr / c ’ Aqdqc; ntfiiov, the field of withdraw¬ 
ing concealment in the sense of oblivion. In this field oi Aqdq the whole 
wandering is gathered. Here the "demonic" of the entire locality dwells 
in the most extreme and highest sense The warrior narrates that the 
way to the field of Ai'jdq leads through a blaze consuming everything 
and through an air that asphyxiates everything; xai yap rival avid 
(to iqc; Aqdqq nrSiov) xrvov SrvSpcJv if xai c'xja yq (pvn (62Ia3f,), 
"Also, it (namely this field of withdrawing concealment) is itself bare 
of all that grows as well as completely void of everything the earth 
lets spring forth," This field of concealment is opposed to all (pvaiq. 
Aqdq does not admit any (pvriv, any emerging and coming forth, Aqdq 
appears as the counter-essence to (pvau;. If we understand (pvoic; as 
"nature," and Aqdq as "forgetting," then we will never comprehend 
how (puoiq and Aqdq come to be opposites, why they stand in an em¬ 
phatic relation to each other. But if we think of them in the Greek 
manner, then it becomes clear that Aqdq as es,sential withdrawing and 
concealing never lets anything emerge, and hence it sets itself against 
all coming forth, i,e,, against (pvaic;. The field of Aqdq prevents every 
disclosure of beings, of the ordinary. In the essential place of At^dq 



§7 Hidden counter-essence (II) 1176-177] 


119 


everything disappears. Yet it is not only the completeness of the with¬ 
drawal or the presumed quantity of the concealment that distinguishes 
this place. The point is rather that the "away" of the withdrawn comes 
into presence itself in the essence of the withdrawal The "away" of 
what is withdrawn and concealed is surely not "nothing," for the letting 
disappear that withdraws everything occurs in this place—in this place 
alone—and presents itself there. The place is void—there is nothing 
at all that is ordinary in it. But the void is precisely what remains and 
what comes into presence there. The barrenness of the void is the noth¬ 
ing of the withdrawal. The void of the place is the look that looks 
into it and "fills" it. The place of \qdq is that "where" in which the 
uncanny dwells in a peculiar exclusivity. The field of \qdq is, in a pre¬ 
eminent sense, "demonic," 

But to the extent that this place, in its own domain, still allows some¬ 
thing to appear and come into presence, then as belonging to the field 
of Xqdt] this must itself partake of the essence of the field. All the wan¬ 
derers Hnd in this place is a river. But already the name of the river 
indicates that it is appropriate to the place, i,e,, it is in service to 
the essence of Aqdq. The river in the field ol Aqdq is called ’AfieAqt;, 
which means "Carefree," The warrior narrating the {ivdot; of the 
daijjovioc; Tonoc; says, (621a4ff.): oxqvdadai ovv (j(pdq qdq rottepat, 
Yiyvopevqq napd toy ’ApeAqia noiapov, ov id vdojp dyyaov ovdev 
aieyeiv. "They pitched their tents after evening descended, near the 
river "Carefree," whose water no vessel could cover, i,e,, contain" 
{cneyq: the rool, the cover). This water does not know care (peAhq) 
concerning what is opposed to disappearance, to going away, and con¬ 
sequently to withdrawing concealment. This water, which cannot be 
contained in any vessel because it is the pure going away itself, does 
not know pfAfti] iqt; dAqdFiat;, care over unconcealedness, the care 
that beings be secured in the unconcealed and therein remain constant, 
"Care" in no way means here a kind of preoccupation or distress over 
some external state of the world and man Instead, care is uniquely 
the care over unconcealedness and belongs in the domain of the 
daipdviov. Care belongs to the event of the essence ol disclosure and 
concealment. Accordingly, the corresponding "carefreeness" is neither 
an arbitrary freedom from preoccupation as regards some thing or other, 
nor is it only a property of man. It is solely the not caring about dAqdFia, 
because "carefreeness" is concerned with the dominion of Aqdq and 
attends to the withdrawing concealment. Therefore this carefreeness 
too is a daipdviov. Hence in the realm of essential thinking, where 
the essence of Being is thought, just as is unconcealedness, whenever 
the word "care" occurs, something else is intended than the regretful¬ 
ness of a human "subject" staggering around in the "nothing in itself," 
in a "lived experience" objectified into empty nothingness. 



120 


The Third Directive 1177-1791 


The water of the river flowing in the field of \i']dq eludes all contain¬ 
ment and itself effectuates only the one withdrawal letting everything 
escape and thus concealing everything. After passage through the 
Saipovioq loiioq, everyone who is to begin again a journey on the 
earth must first drink from the water of the river "Carefree," and pre¬ 
cisely a certain amount: jjeipuv jjev ovv ii lov vbaioq ndaiv dvayxaiov 
nvai nieiv, "It is necessary for everyone to drink a certain amount of 
this water" (62Ia6f), Everyone going through the mortal journey on 
earth is on the earth and in the midst of beings in such a way that 
on account of this drink there hold sway a concealment and a with¬ 
drawal of beings, so that a being only is insofar as at the same time 
and in opposition to this concealment and this withdrawal there also 
prevails an unconcealedness in which the unconcealed is conserved. 
By this drink, taken in measure, the man returning to earth carries 
an essential belongingness to the domain of the essence of concealment. 
All dwell to a certain degree within the essential region of 
concealment— lovt; de (ppovqoFi pi] OM^opevovt; iiAiov in'vav lov 
peipov "But the ones who were not saved by insight drank more than 
the measure" (62Ia7f), OpovqoK; here means the insight of the intui¬ 
tion that looks into what is properly intuitable and unconcealed. 

The look-into meant here is the looking of the gaze into the essence, 
i,e,, the gaze of "philosophy," 0pdvi](jii; here means the same as "phi¬ 
losophy," and that title means, to have sight for what is essential. He 
who can look in such a way is a oo)i,dp£voq, a saved one, "saved" 
namely in the relation of Being to man. The word (jco^tiv, like (ppavpait; 
and (pL\()(j()(pia, is an essential word The Greek thinkers speak of 
oip^eiv id (paivoptva —"to save what appears"; that means to conserve 
and to preserve in unconcealedness what shows itself as what shows 
itself and in the way it shows itself—that is, against the withdrawal 
into concealment and distortion He who in this fashion saves (con¬ 
serves and preserves) the appearing, saves it into the unconcealed, is 
himself saved for the unconcealed and conserved for it. The ones, how¬ 
ever, who are not like that, who thus lack the gaze into the essence, 
are dvev (piAodocpiat;, "without philosophy," "Philosophy" is accord¬ 
ingly not a mere dealing with universal concepts on the part of thinking, 
to which one can dedicate oneself or not without there occurring any¬ 
thing essential. Philosophy means to be addressed by Being itself Phi¬ 
losophy is in itself the basic mode in which man comports himself to 
beings in the midst of beings. Men who lack philosophy arc without 
insight. They deliver themselves over to what happens to appear and 
likewise to what happens to disappear. They arc at the mercy of the 
withdrawal and the concealment of beings. They drink beyond the mea¬ 
sure of the water of the river "Carefree," They are the careless ones, 
who feel content with the thoughtlessness that has withdrawn from 



§7 Hidden counter-essence (II) 1179-1801 


I2I 


every claim on the thinker These careless ones are the ones who have 
become happy in putting behind themselves the care concomitant with 
belonging to a people of poets and thinkers, (In recent days it was 
publicly announced by the ministry of propaganda in a loud voice that 
the Germans no longer need "thinkers and poets" but "corn and oil,") 

"Philosophy," as the heedfulness to the claim of Being on man, is 
first of all the care for Being and never a matter of "cultural formation" 
and knowledge. Therefore it is possible that many persons may possess 
a great amount of learned information about philosophical opinions 
without ever being "philosophical" and without "philosophizing," Then 
again, others may be touched by the claim of Being without knowing 
what it is and without responding to the claim of Being with appropriate 
thinking. 

Of course a certain knowledge belongs to this thoughtful thinking 
and so does a carefulness in reflection and in the use of words, which 
essentially surpasses all demands of mere scientific accuracy. According 
to the experience of the Greek thinkers, this thinking always remains 
a saving of the unconcealed from concealment in the sense of veiling 
withdrawal. This latter is experienced more originally in thought than 
anywhere else The thinker in particular must have drunk the just mea¬ 
sure of water from the river "Carefree," "Seeing," in the sense of the 
gaze into the essence, the seeing of genuine thinking, does not come 
about by itself but is, in a different way than the usual "seeing" and 
"seeing-to," threatened on all sides by errors. But what about the one 
who not only drinks beyond the measure, but who drinks only this 
water? 


Recapitulation 


I) Field and lethe. The divine for the Greeks: the uncanny in the 
ordinary. The defov in primordial dAqdeia and Aqdq. 'AAqdeia and 

dm (Parmenides). 

About the time that the Greeks departed from their essential history, 
they expressed once more the legend of the counter-essence of dAijdna, 
the pvdot; of Ai'jdi]. This legend, which concludes Plato's dialogue 
"Politeia," ends with a tale about Aqdi]. This observation is correct, 
but in such a casual form it may easily occasion a misinterjtretation 
of the essence of Aqdq. In truth what is at issue here is id if/c Aijdqq 
nedidv —the field of withdrawing concealment, Plato does not say sim¬ 
ply id ntdiov Tf/c Aqdqt;, but id iqc mhiov. Initially, the rela¬ 

tion between the field and Aqdi] is left undetermined, because the lin- 



122 


The Third Directive II80-I82I 


guistic expression, the genitive, can mean many different things: in the 
first place, it could mean that in the field Aqdq occurs and appears. 
Taken in this way the field and Aqdq are indifferent to one another. 
But the field can also be determined in its character as a field precisely 
on the basis of Aqdq and become in that way a region appropriate 
to Ai]dq alone. Here field and Aqdq are indeed still distinguished, but 
they are no longer indifferent to one another. Finally the field and its 
character as field can belong to Aqdq itself Now field and Aqdq are 
not distinguished from each other, but Aqdq itself is field. It is the place, 
the "where," in such a way that withdrawing concealment does not 
occur at some spot or other within the field but instead is itself the 
"where" for what must belong to it. Accordingly, what is to be thought 
is "the field of Aqdq.” This field belongs together with other places, 
and as a whole they make up a lonoq daqiovioc,: a "demonic district," 
The elucidation of the essence of the daqioviov leads to a clarification 
of the essence of the ddov. Together, these provide an indication of 
the essence of the Greek divinities. This indication would certainly be 
very much misunderstood if it were to engender the view that hence¬ 
forth "we" could straightaway be certain on our own of the essence 
of the Greek gods and therewith be assured of their proximity. The 
indication docs not reach that far It can only remind us that as long 
as the essence of dAqdeia is not completely disinterred, we will not 
have preserved the one thing by which wc might endure the remoteness 
of the Greek gods, acknowledge this remoteness as an event of our 
history, and experience these gods as the ones they used to be. Instead 
of that, wc arc still in constant danger—from literary works, books, 
conferences, and feuilletons—of being talked into and persuaded of an 
immediate relation to the Greek gods. It makes no matter here whether 
this literature is professorially boring in the style of the historiography 
of religion or whether the results of the historiography of religion are 
elaborated and recounted more poetically The way to these gods, even 
to their remoteness, certainly leads through the word. But this word 
cannot be "literature " (Experts know of course that the fine book of 
W, F, Otto, Die Cotter Griechenlands, does not belong to this literature; 
but even here the step into the domain of ccAqdna is lacking,) 

For the Greeks the divine is based immediately on the uncanny in 
the ordinary. It comes to light in the distinction of the one from the 
other. Nowhere do we find here a display of unusual beings, by means 
of which the divine would first have to be awakened and a sense for 
it first aroused. Therefore also the question of the so-callcd "Dionysian" 
must be unfolded first as a Greek question. For many reasons wc may 
doubt whether the Nietzschcan interpretation of the Dionysian can 
justly be maintained, or whether it is not a coarse interpreting back 
of an uncritical nineteenth century "biologism" into the Greek world. 



§7 Hidden counter-essence (II) II82-I83I 


123 


Everywhere there holds sway in advance for the Greeks the simple 
clarity of Being which lets beings arise in a lustre and sink down into 
darkness. 

Therefore what belongs to the appearance of Being is still of the type 
uncanny, so that there is no need to ascribe to Being a divine character 
subsequently and to demonstrate it afterward. If now, however, ccAqdeia 
belongs to the essence of primordial Being and so does its counter¬ 
essence Aqdq, then each of these is primordially a daov. Therefore 
even for Plato Aqdi] is still essentially "demonic.” Should we then be 
offended if in Parmenides' primordial thinking ccAqdeia appears as dea, 
as goddess? We would now be more surprised if that were not the 
case. 

Aqdq, in Plato's "myth," is the Saqioviov of a field that resides not 
in the here but in the there. This field is the ultimate thoroughfare, 
where the wanderers must stop immediately prior to their transition 
out of the there into the here. It is said of the "held of Aqdq": xevdv 
SevSptJv Tf xai oaa yq <pv£i —"it is bare of all that grows as well as 
completely empty of everything that the earth allows to spring forth," 


b) The measure of withdrawing concealment in unconcealedness. 

The countenance of the idea in Plato and the grounding of 
anamnesis (as well as forgetting) in unconcealedness. Aqdq: 
nediov. The interpretation of the beginning of Homer's poems and 
of Parmenides' utterance. The unforgetting of dAqdeia through the 
withdrawal of Aqdq. The overcoming of experience since Plato 
through procedural operations (rfjvq). 

Reference to Homer, Iliad, XXIII, 358ff. 

Tov de del ttidvia ndvicov eniAavddveadai —"However, for one who 
would constantly drink (this water) his relation to beings as a whole 
and to himself would stand in the concealment that withdraws every¬ 
thing and does not leave anything preserved" (62Ia8f). On such a 
one further words should not be wasted He could not be on earth 
as a man, since all beings would be concealed to him and there would 
be nothing unconcealed at all, nothing to which he could relate disclo- 
sivcly, i,e„ for the Greeks, in speech (pvdoc;, Aoyoc;), and thereby be 
a man. Complete, measureless oblivion, i.e,, concealment, would ex¬ 
clude the least ground of the essence of man, because such oblivion 
would allow no disclosure and would deny unconcealedness its essen¬ 
tial foundation. Conversely, we see from this that a measure of with¬ 
drawing concealment belongs to the possibility of unconccalcdness, 
Aqdq, the concealment that docs not allow anything to emerge but 
only withdraws, nevertheless prepares the ground of essence of disclo¬ 
sure and so holds sway in unconcealedness. 



124 


The Third Directive [183—1851 


Man stems from the district of the uncanny divine place of withdraw¬ 
ing concealment. And since Aqdt] pertains to the essence of aXqdeia, 
un-concealedness itself cannot be the mere elimination of concealedness. 
The a in d-Atjdaa in no way means simply an undetermined universal 
"un-" and "not," Rather, the saving and conserving of the un-concealed 
is necessarily in relation to concealment, understood as the withdrawal 
of what appears in its appearing. The conserving is grounded in a per¬ 
petual saving and preserving. This preserving of the unconcealed comes 
to pass in its pure essence when man strives freely for the unconcealed 
and does so incessantly throughout his mortal course on earth. To strive 
for something freely and to think only of it is in Greek fivdofiai; the 
"perpetual" endurance on a path and a course is in Greek dvd —; the 
incessant thinking of something, the pure saving into unconcealedness 
of what is thought, is thus dvdiivi]aii,. A self-manifesting being, having 
come into unconcealedness as such, is understood by Plato as that 
which steps into view and thus emerges in its look. The "look" in which 
something comes to presence as unconcealed, i,e , in which it is, is 
what is meant by ddoi;. The sight and the aspect something offers, 
through which it looks at man, is iSta. Thought in Plato's sense, uncon¬ 
cealedness occurs as idea and eidoc,. In these and through these, beings, 
i,e,, what is present, come to presence. The idea is the countenance 
by which at any time self-disclosive beings look at man. The idea is 
the presence of what is present, the Being of beings. But since dAqdeia 
is the overcoming of Aqdi], what is unconcealed must be saved in un¬ 
concealedness and be secured in it. Thus man can comport himself 
to beings as unconcealed only if he perpetually directs his thinking to 
the unconcealedness of the unconcealed, i,e , to the idea and the eidoi;, 
and in that way saves beings from withdrawal into concealment. 

In Plato's sense, i e,, thought in the Greek way, the relation to the 
Being of beings is therefore dvdiivqaiq. This word is usually translated 
as "memory" or perhaps "recollection," This translation transforms 
everything into the "psychological" and does not at all touch the essen¬ 
tial relation to idea. The translation of dvd/iv/jrr/c'by "recollection" im¬ 
plies it is a matter here only of something "forgotten" welling up in 
man once again. But we have learned in the meantime that the Greeks 
experience forgetting as the event of the concealment of beings; accord¬ 
ingly, so-called "memory" is actually based on unconcealediiess and 
disclosedness 

Plato inaugurates, along with the transformation of the essence of 
dAqdeia into dfioitoait;, a transformation of Aqdq and of the dvdjivqoK; 
opposing it. The event of the withdrawing concealment becomes trans¬ 
formed into the human comportment of forgetting. Similarly, what is 
opposed to Aqdq becomes a fetching back again by man,. As long as 



§7 Hidden counter-essence (II) 1185—186] 


125 


we think the Platonic dvdjivqoK; and aiiXavddvEodai only on the basis 
of what came afterward i.e,, in modern terms, think them only in a 
"subjective” sense as "remembering" and "forgetting," we will not grasp 
their essential ground for the Greeks, which in the thinking of Plato 
and Aristotle radiates its light for the last time. 

The tale of the water of the river "Carefree" is the last word the 
warrior pronounces regarding the daifioviot; lonoc,. The fivdot; reaches 
its peak in the legend of the field of Aqdq. The essential view of thinking, 
which gathers everything into itself and finds expression in this dialogue 
on the essence of the iioAk;, is directed to the region of withdrawing 
concealment. This is the one and only thing necessary, since d-Aqdaa, 
which is what is to be experienced, is itself by essence founded on 
Aqdq. Between these nothing mediates and there is no transition, be¬ 
cause both in themselves pertain immediately to each other by their 
very essence. Whenever a belonging together is an essential one, the 
transition from one side to the other is "sudden;" it takes only a moment 
and is over in a trice. Therefore the warrior concludes his "narration" 
of the {ivdoq with the following words (621blff) rnndq Sf xoifiqvai 
xai ^£oaq vvxiac, yevsadai, fipoviqv le xai (jaapdv yevsadai, xai 
ivT£V<p£v i-^atn'vqq dAAov dAAq (pepnidai dvco dc, iqv yfveoiv, 
qnoviac; iot^nep dmepaq. "After they lay down to rest and midnight 
struck, a thunderstorm and an earthquake set in, and from there (from 
the field of Aqdq) all of a sudden everyone else was carried away, going 
toward the emerging prominence (toward being on earth) like a llight 
of stars (shooting stars)," auzde; de lov piv vdazot; xojAvdqvai iiidv 
"He himself, however, was indeed prevented from drinking the water" 
(62Ib4f), 

That is decisive' the pvdoq does not tear away from concealment 
something unconcealed but speaks out of that region from which 
springs forth the original essential unity of the two, where the beginning 
is, dnq pevroi xai dnax; dc; id (jcUpa dzpixoiio, ovx ddevai, dAA' 
^^aizpvqq dva^Aeipaq iddv i'odtv avidv xeipzvov rni iq nvpd. "In 
what way meanwhile and in what fashion he came into his 'bodily' 
presence he claimed not to know, but he did know that when he sud¬ 
denly opened his eyes, he saw it was morning and he himself was 
lying on the pyre" (62Ib5ff) 

The looking up, the seeing of the idea, the dawning light, the morn¬ 
ing, the fire and the pyre—all this expresses in such an essential way 
relations and features of Greek thinking that we are listening inappro¬ 
priately to the concluding word of the pvdoq if we find in it merely 
a figurative ending to the narrative Now is not the time to consider 
these relations. But neither may we close our ears to what Socrates, 
i.e„ here, Plato himself, remarks concerning the /iudocjust told, Kai 



126 


The Third Directive 1186-188] 


omcoq, (I) r\avx(jjv, pvdoq eocodi] xai ovx dncoAFio, xai qjjdc; dv 
0 (jj 0 £i£v, dv n£idci)fi£da avico, xai idv iqt; Aqdqc, nojafidv £v 
f)iapqo6ii£da xai t/)v (pvxqv ov fiiavdqo6fi£da. "And so, O Glaucon, 
a legend has been saved and did not get lost, and it could save us, 
too, if we would be obedient to it; and then we will fittingly traverse 
the river flowing in the field of Aqdq and will not desecrate the 'soul,' 
i.e,, the fundamental power to say beings" (62Ib8ff), 

Once again there is talk of ocoi^aiv, saving. What is preserved and 
secured is the legend of the essence of Aqdq, the withdrawing conceal¬ 
ment, That the fivdot; as a whole is to secure in the unconcealed pre¬ 
cisely this closing expression of the essence of concealment can be rec¬ 
ognized from the fact that out of the rich content of the {ivdot; Plato 
in the end once more mentions idv jqt; Aqdqq noiafiov, the river 
flowing in the field of Aqdq A superficial reading of this passage had 
already in antiquity led to the false notion of a "river Lethe," as if Aqdq 
itself were the river. But Aqdq is neither the river itself, nor is it symbo¬ 
lized by the river, Aqdq is ntdiov, field, region, the essence of the place 
and of the sojourn from which there is a sudden transition to a place 
and a sojourn that, as the unconcealedness of beings, envelops the mor¬ 
tal course of man In the emptiness and abandonment of the field of 
all-withdrawing concealment, what alone can exist is this river, because 
its water corresponds to the essence of the field in that this water with¬ 
draws from and eludes all containment and in that way carries the 
essence of the place of the withdrawing concealment everywhere it 
is taken as a drink The place of Aqdq is to be traversed only by travers¬ 
ing the single thing that exists at this place, namely the water of the 
river. If it were only a matter of stepping across, then the water would 
run past the ones who are crossing and would flow away and would 
not affect them in their essence. But the crossing must occur and does 
occur only by the water becoming a drink and thus entering into man 
and determining him from the very innermost of his e,ssence. And 
thereby it also determines how man, destined to unconcealedness, will 
in the future stand in the unconcealed while retaining a relation to 
withdrawing concealment. The appropriate, i,e,, the measured crossing 
of the river flowing through the place of Aqdq consists in taking a drink 
of the water according to the fitting measure. Yet the essence of man, 
and not only the individual man in his destiny, is ,saved only when 
man, as the being he is, harkens to the legend of concealment. Only 
in that way can he follow what unconcealedness itself and the disclo¬ 
sure of the unconcealed demand in their essence. 

Without insight into the daqioviov of Aqdq, we will never be able 
to appreciate the astonishing fact that the "mother of the muses," and 
consequently the essential beginning of poetry, is "Mnemosyne," i,e,, 
the primordial free salvation and preservation of Being, without which 



§7 Hidden counter-essence (II) 1188-189] 


111 


poetizing would even lack what is to be poetized. If we look into this 
essential connection between Being and unconcealedness, between un¬ 
concealedness and salvation versus the concealed, between salvation 
and preservation. Being and word, word and saying, saying and poetiz¬ 
ing, and poetizing and thinking, we will then perceive the first lines 
of Homer's poems quite differently than we used to: 

ILIAD Mqviv aabt', dta, 1 IqAqidbeu) 'A)(iAi)()c: / ovAoiievqv,' 
odyssey: Avbpa jjoi fVve/re, Movoa, noAvipoiiov, oc paAa noAAct 
nAayxbq/ 

Here the "goddess" and the "muse" are not simply "invoked" for 
the purpose of a solemn introduction, but these lines say that the utter¬ 
ance of the poetical word is the speaking and the song of Being itself, 
and the poet is merely the eppqvtvc;, the interpreter of the word. The 
poet does not invoke the goddess, but instead, even before saying his 
first word the poet is already invoked him,self and already stands within 
the appeal of Being and as such is a savior of Being versus the "de¬ 
monic" withdrawal of concealment. 

If Parmenides names the goddess AAqdeia at the very outset of his 
utterance, that is not, as philologists maintain, a kind of poetically fash¬ 
ionable introduction to his so-called "didactic poem," but instead it 
is the naming of the essential place, where the thinker as thinker dwells. 
The place is baipoviot; Toiiot;. 

For us of today the pvdot; of Aqdq at the conclusion of the dialogue 
on the n6Ai(; is the last word of the Greeks on the hidden counter¬ 
essence to dAqdna. This withdrawing counter-essence to disclosedness 
"withholds" unconcealedness but at the same time also holds in itself 
the essence of unconcealedness. What is counter to d\qdna is neither 
simply the opposite, nor the bare lack, nor the rejection of it as mere 
denial, Aqdq, the oblivion of withdrawing concealment, is that with¬ 
drawal by means of which alone the essence of dAqdeia can be pre¬ 
served and thus be and remain unforgotten. Thoughtless opinion main¬ 
tains that something is preserved the soonest and is preservable the 
easiest when it is constantly at hand and graspable. But in truth, and 
that now means for us truth in the sense of the essence of unconcealed¬ 
ness, it is self-withdrawing concealment that in the highest way disposes 
human beings to preserving and to faithfulness. For the Greeks, the 
withdrawing and self-withdrawing concealment is the simplest of the 
simple, preserved for them in their experience of the unconcealed and 
therein allowed to come into presence. Therefore Plato could not invent 


1, ' O goddess, sing of (he faial vengeance of (he Peleidian Achilles"—TV 
2 "O muse, sing for me of ihai much-wandering and much-suffering man"—TV 



128 


The Third Directive //89-/90/ 


the jjvdoc; of Aqdq; no pvdcx; is ever invented nor found by seeking. 
The legendary word is a response to the word of an appeal in which 
Being itself dispenses itself to man and therewith first indicates the paths 
a seeking might take within the sphere of what is disclosed in advance. 

Certainly the time of Plato, four centuries later, is no longer the age 
of Homer, The ability, hence the inclination as well as the aptitude, 
to express the appeal of Being becomes more and more concerned with 
establishing something that has been attained in the meanwhile, namely 
a being-at-home in beings on the basis of what man has instituted by 
his own procedures. The legendary word is not weaker; but man's per¬ 
ception is more variegated and dispersed and hence too volatile to expe¬ 
rience as present the simple, which comes into presence originarily and 
therefore constantly. In the final era of the completion of the Greek 
world, we recognize already the traces of the early form of that historical 
condition which then determines the epoch of modernity in the West, 
In this epoch, as a consequence of a peculiarly concealed incertitude, 
certitude in the sense of unconditional certainty counts as what is most 
valuable, and therefore ascertaining becomes the basic character of all 
comportment. Ascertaining is not a merely subsequent corroboration 
but is rather the aggressive making secure in advance for the sake of 
certitude. The content and the reality of everything objective has what¬ 
ever validity it has as the inexhaustible occasion for objectivization in 
the sense of the certification of the content of world and "life," Proce¬ 
dural processes (ie\vi]) and their modes dominate experience, A river 
no longer flows in the mysterious course of its windings and turnings 
along banks it itself has carved out, but it now only pushes its water 
to an "end" predirected to it without detours, between the uniform 
rails of cement walls, which are in no way banks. The fact that precisely 
at the time of Socrates and Plato the word lexvi], which there surely 
still means something essentially different from technique in the sense 
of modern technology, is often used, and is already thought of, is a 
sign that procedural processes are lording it over experience. The ability 
to listen to legend becomes weaker and more withdrawn from its es¬ 
sence. 

The legendary word of Homer has not faded away. The otherwise 
silent pvdoq of Aqdq exists. Therefore even the Platonic [ivdot; of Aqdq 
is a remembering of, not merely a thinking "about," the Aqdq Pindar 
and Hesiod mention. This remembering utterance of the [ivdot; pre¬ 
serves the primordial unveiling of the essence of Aqdq and at the same 
time helps us to think more attentively the domain in which Homer 
already mentions the counter-word to Aqdq, dAqdna. 

In the penultimate book ^ (XXIII) of the Iliad there is in verse 358ff 
a passage referred to at the conclusion of the consideration of the oppo¬ 
sitional character of the essence of dAqdna. This song poetizes the 



§7 Hidden counter-essence (II) 1190-192] 


129 


death, the ritual burning, and the funeral of Achilles' fallen friend 
Patroclos, and it poetizes the war games instituted in honor of Achilles. 
The first of the games is to be the contest of the chariots. After Achilles 
drew lots determining the order of the warriors, 

(jqpqvf 5i' Ttppai' 'ApAAtvc; 
iqXoOev iv Ano) mSio) ttapa fit- axondv eiaev 
dvti'Oeov 0(>i'vixa, ottaova umpoq eoio, 
d)(; pepveqtio dpopovc; xai dXqdeiqv attoEutoi. 

“Achilles indicates the turn (of the course), 

(letting it appear) farther in broad space, and next to the end of the course 
he places 

the divine Phoenix, the war companion of his father, 

so that he might keep the course in view and accordingiy bring to word 

what is unconceaied " 

(bq pt'pvecoTo fipopovq —so that he might keep, i.e , so that he will 
not let fall away into concealment the outcome of the battle of the 
chariots. Here dXqdFia, the unconcealedness of the battle, i.e., the battle 
as it appears in its presence, is founded unequivocally on a pepvetpm — 
we would say on a "not forgetting," though in that way we would 
falsify the matter. Indeed in the Greek language pipvqoxeiv and 
pepvqpai surely express the counter-essence to eniAavddvtadai. But 
the latter is determined on the basis of its relation to Aqdq. Accordingly, 
in the original understanding of pipvqoxeiv ihcrc lies the sense of keep¬ 
ing, and precisely the holding of the unconcealed as such. This holding 
is, however, not a mere be-holding or taking notice but is letting oneself 
be held by unconccalcdncss, dwelling in it as that which secures the 
unconcealed again.st the withdrawal of concealment. 


Recapitulation 


2) The origination of man out of the uncanny district of 
withdrawing concealment. The inception of the transformation of 
man's basic position. The coming to presence together of dAqdeia 

and pepvqpai. 

Reference to Homer, Iliad, XXIII, 358ff. 

Plato's myth at the conclusion of the Politcia says that man stems from 
the uncanny district of withdrawing concealment and in the "here" 
traverses a mortal course through beings in the midst of beings as a 
whole. Therefore, in opposition to the concealment he bears with him 
as the legacy of that district, when man returns to the "here," he must 



130 


The Third Directive 1192—1931 


first freely pursue (jjvdojjai) beings. He does so by removing the con¬ 
cealment and thus letting the un-concealed show itself. Beings show 
themselves first by being un-concealed, because concealedness sur¬ 
rounds those who have been transposed back into the here, as a conse¬ 
quence of the draught they had to take from the river in the Aqdq-p\acc. 
The pvdoc; understands the necessity of dAqdeia and its essential relat¬ 
edness to Aqdi], as the ground preceding it, on the basis of the essential 
provenance and destiny of man. This emphatic reference to man already 
indicates a transformation of the basic position of thinking among the 
Greeks. This transformation signifies the inception of metaphysics. The 
history of the Greeks thus heads toward the completion of its essential 
possibility. Aqdq will no longer be experienced as a pure event but 
will be thought on the basis of the comportment of man in the sense 
of the later “forgetting." 

But if Aqdq, no matter how conceived, is originally the counter¬ 
essence to dAqdna, and if to Aqdq as withdrawing concealment there 
corresponds a losing in the sense of forgetting, then a keeping and pre¬ 
serving must also originally stand in a correspondence to dAqdna. 
Where dAqdeia comes to presence there holds sway a keeping of that 
which is saved from loss. Unconcealedness and keeping, dAqdeia and 
pepvqpai. come to presence together. And this original belonging to¬ 
gether of both, precisely as primordial, must also possess the inconspicu¬ 
ous character of what, like a source, comes to presence out of itself 
in its essence Indeed there is testimony to this. We have in mind a 
place in Homer, Iliad, XXIII, 358ff Achilles orders Phoenix, at the battle 
of the chariots, wc fiefivecoio dpdfiovc; xai dAqdeiqv dnoeinoi, “to keep 
the course in view and accordingly to bring to word the unconcealed." 

Let it be noted parenthetically that dAqdeia and enoq — 
unconcealedness and word—are again mentioned together. 



Part Two 


The Fourth Directive from the 
li'anslating Word AaPISEIA. The Open 
and Free Space of the Clearing of Being. 
The Goddess "Ti-uth." 


§8. The fuller significance of dis-closure. The transition to 
subjectivity. The fourth directive: the open, the free. The event of 
dAqdeia in the West. The groundlessness of the open. The alienation 

of man. 


a) Preparation for the fourth directive. The insufficiency of 
"unconcealedness" as the translation used up to now. The 
ambiguity of the word "dis-closure" and its fuller significance. The 
conflict in primordial aAqdeia. Proximity and beginning. Reference 
to Homer. The two senses of appearance: pure emergence and 
being-encountered. Egohood. Reference to Kant, Descartes, Herder, 
Nietzsche. The priority of selfhood since Plato and Aristotle 
{Flepi vxqq, 8, 431; Mei a, 1). 

Mepvqpai and dAqdaa are linked together in the verse from the Iliad 
quoted above (verse 361) and, specifically, there unconcealedness is 
a consequence of a keeping. That means Homer experiences the essen¬ 
tial relation between dAqdeia and Aqdq in simple clarity and under¬ 
stands dAqdeia on the basis of its relation to the concealing withdrawal 
of Aqdq. Voss's translation of the verse, "To take good notice of the 
course and to proclaim everything precisely," bears not the slightest 
trace of what the Greek is saying. 'AAqdeq has become "precise" and 
pepvqpai mere "taking notice." The intrusion of "subjectivity" and of 
"subjective comportment” into the essential relation between aAqdeia 
and pepvqpai is obvious. 

In this passage, unconcealedness and the keeping that for us counts 
as a counter-comportment to "forgetting" are mentioned as it were 
spontaneously and for the Greeks in a "natural" way in their essential 
relationship. But it would be erroneous to claim, solely on the basis 
of this passage, that unconcealedness corresponds to not-forgetting and 


131 



132 


The Fourth Directive [I96-I97] 


that the aAi]de<;, the unconcealed, is precisely what is not-forgotten. 
It is so, by all means, but only under the presupposition that we think 
of forgetting in terms of dAqdtia and not substitute for the essence 
of Aqdq the "forgetting" which is later understood as inadvertence, a 
kind of psychic-subjective comportment. 

Yet the "unconcealed" cannot simply be identified with the unforgot¬ 
ten, because the "unforgotten" may be something false and untrue and 
consequently is not by necessity something true, dAqdtq. But does this 
not also apply to the unconcealed as much as to the unforgotten, 
namely that it can be something false as well as something true? Be¬ 
sides, the so-called "false" must surely be something unconcealed and 
therefore would be true. The "unconcealed" also appears in the guise 
of mere semblance What then distinguishes that unconcealed we call 
"the true"^ 

Hereby we are directing our gaze onto nexuses and abysses Greek 
thinking did not avoid, though we ourselves can hardly still surmise 
them, for we unwittingly mix into these necessary questions our ordi¬ 
nary understanding of the essence of truth, i.e., truth in the sense of 
"correctness" and "certitude.” We can now sec only this much, that 
mere unconccalcdncss, in which even something "false" may stand, 
does not exhaust the essence of dAqdtia: spoken more prudently, up 
to now we have not thought the essence of dAqdeia exhaustively. In 
fact through what we have just observed, i.e , in view of the essential 
relation of dAqdtia to Aqdq (withdrawing concealment), a primordial 
essential moment of dAqdtia manifests itself, one that we have not 
yet mentioned and that is by no means expressed in the translation 
"unconcealedness," at all events not as long as we think "unconcealed- 
ncss" in a careless and indeterminate way simply as the absence and 
elimination of conccaledncss. 

The unconcealed is originarily what is saved Irom withdrawing con¬ 
cealment and hence is secured in dis-closurc and as such is uneluded. 
The unconcealed does not come into presence indeterminately, as if 
the veil of concealment had simply been lilted. The unconcealed is the 
un-absent, over which a withdrawing concealment no longer holds 
sway. The coming into presence is itself an emerging, that is, a coming 
forth into unconcealedness, in such a way that the emerged and the 
unconcealed are assumed into unconcealedness, saved by it and secured 
in it "’AAqdtx," the "unconcealed," reveals its essence to us now more 
clearly precisely from its relation to Aqdq. The unconcealed is what 
has entered into the tranquility of pure self-appearance and of the 
"look." The unconcealed is what is secured thereby. The clarification 
of the essence of the counter-essence, Aqdq as withdrawing con¬ 
cealment, first allows the essence of dis-closure to be brought into the 
light. 



§8 Significance of dis-closure 1197-1991 


133 


At the outset, “dis-closure" could only say as much as “un-veiling," 
the removal of the veiling and the concealment. But disclosure or dis- 
concealment does not mean the mere removal and elimination of con¬ 
cealment. We must think dis-closure exactly the way we think of dis¬ 
charging (igniting) or dis-playing (unfolding). Discharging means to 
release the charge; displaying means to let play out the folds of the 
manifold in their multiplicity. Our first tendency is to understand dis¬ 
closure or disconcealing in opposition to concealing, just as disentangling 
is opposed to entangling. Disclosure, however, does not simply result 
in something disclosed as unclosed. Instead, the dis-closure [En\.-bergen\ 
is at the same time an en-closure [£«r-bergen], just like dis-semination, 
which is not opposed to the seed, or like in-flaming [Entflammen], which 
does not eliminate the flame [Flamme] but brings it into its essence. 
Dis-closure [Entbergung] is equally for the sake of an en-closure as a 
sheltering [Bergung] of the unconcealed in the unconcealedness of pres¬ 
ence, i.e., in Being. In such sheltering there first emerges the uncon¬ 
cealed as a being. Disclosure—that now means to bring into a sheltering 
enclosure: that is, to conserve the unconcealed in unconcealedness. The 
word "dis-closure," the appropriateness of which only a far-reaching 
meditation could reveal, contains in its full sense equally essentially 
this emphasized moment of shelter, whereas "unconcealedness" names 
only the removal of concealedness. The word “dis-closure" is essentially 
and advisedly ambiguous in that it expresses a two-fold with an intrinsic 
unity: on the one hand, as ^//sclosure it is the removal of concealment 
and precisely a removal first of the withdrawing concealment (Aqdq) 
and then also of distortion and displacement {ipevSoq); on the other 
hand, however, as disclosure it is a sheltering en-closure, i.e., an assum¬ 
ing and preserving in unconcealedness 

“Disclosure,” understood in its full essence, means the unveiling shel¬ 
tering enclosure of the unveiled in unconcealedness. It itself is of a 
concealed essence. We see this first by looking upon Aqdq and its hold¬ 
ing sway, which withdraws into absence and points to a falling away 
and a falling out. 

The lesson to be drawn, therefore, from our meditation on the opposi¬ 
tion holding sway in unconcealedness is not that besides distortion and 
falsity, i.e., in brief, besides untruth, there would still be another 
counter-essence to truth, namely Arjdq. Rather, our reflection resulted 
in the far-reaching insight that out of this counter-essence to truth the 
only conflictual and primordial essence of aAqdeia itself reveals itself 
more originally. 'AAqdeia is against concealing closure, and through 
this "against" it is/or sheltering enclosure. 'AAqdeia is against conceal¬ 
ing because it comes to presence in the unconcealed for the sake of 
a sheltering. 

This "for" and “against" of aAqdeia are in themselves not "ruptures" 



134 


The Fourth Directive [199-200] 


through which its essence falls apart and thereby falls out into the 
essential-less, but instead they mark the conflict out of which dAqdeia 
is unified in its essence, and out of which it begins. The conflictual 
unity of immanence in the primordial essence is inwardness. 

Admittedly, the Greeks think and speak still less about this more pri¬ 
mordial essence of dAqdeia than about the essence of Aqdq, for dAqdeia 
is to them the simple beginning of all that comes into presence. The 
Greeks therefore feel no urgency and have no incentive to direct their 
poetizing, thinking, and saying back into or beyond this beginning. For 
the Greeks there emerges in this beginning itself enough of what is 
entrusted to the saying of their poetry and thought, to its setting-up 
and rearranging. For us who have come later, however, just to get some 
inkling of this most primordial beginning of the history of the West 
we must explicitly pay heed to it and follow the directives the word 
"unconcealedness" provides. 

By following the third directive and thinking through the opposi¬ 
tional essence of "unconcealedness" beyond the limits of the usual op¬ 
position (truth-untruth), both of the first mentioned directives take on 
a clearer imprint. That "unconcealedness" is related to "concealedness 
and concealment" has meant for us more than a mere verbal analysis 
of "unconcealedness" could yield. Likewise, the "im" in "unconcealed¬ 
ness" has revealed an essential "oppositional" manifold and has given 
a clue to the conflictual essence of truth But if now by focusing on 
Aqdq we glimpse the basic feature of sheltering enclosure in the essence 
of disclosure, and if this shelter secures in unconcealedness what it has 
to secure and to save, then the question looms large as to what uncon¬ 
cealedness itself might be, such that it can hold sway as sheltering and 
saving. 

Thus it becomes necessary to follow a fourth directive the translating 
word "unconcealedness" offers to our thoughtful attention. What this 
fourth and last directive brings to our attention, which we must gradu¬ 
ally learn to experience, was mentioned by the Greeks even less, was 
less explicitly thought of, and was less explicitly founded, than the pre¬ 
viously mentioned features of the essence of dAqdeia. Still it rests pri- 
mordially in the same, as yet concealed, essence of unconcealedness. 
Let us see what we can see here, without first relating to the previous 
directives. In doing so, however, it will necessarily appear that we are 
now more than ever interpreting back into the essence of the Greek 
dAqdeia something that does not reside in it. Measured against the 
barriers of the horizon of historiography, and of what is historiographi- 
cally ascertainable, and of the "facts," everywhere so cherished, what 
is said here about dXqdeia is "in fact" an interpretation read into it. 
But if, on the contrary, we do not force on history historiographical 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [200-202] 


135 


honzons and cover it with them, if we rather let the beginning be the 
beginning it is, then another law holds. According to this law, we cannot 
read enough into the beginning, or, better said, we cannot interpret 
enough out of it, so long as we merely pay heed to this beginning 
in the rigor of its essence and do not get caught up in our own arbitrari¬ 
ness. For the reflection that attempts to investigate the essence of "truth" 
by no means desires, in the self-satisfied zeal of erudition, simply to 
discover what was once meant or was not meant. That could only be 
a preparation for the essential truth, which is "more alive" than today's 
much-invoked "life" and concerns man's historical destiny, because this 
essence has come to presence for us already now long ago, without 
our thinking of it or making ourselves ready for it. 

What we are presently trying to bring into essential focus, through 
the fourth directive, belongs even more primordially to the essence of 
aAqdeia than the counter-essence discussed up to now in all its multi¬ 
plicity. Since our focus is to be directed to something that comes to 
presence more primordially in dAqdna, therefore, along with dAqdeia 
and through it, it is disclosed prior to all else, and as unconcealed it 
is still closer to us than what is closest, i.e , closer than what otherwise 
stands out first in the essence of aAqdeia. What we are now to be 
directed toward is nearer to us than what is ordinarily and "at first" 
the closest, and therefore it is correspondingly more difficult to see. 
Thus in the zeal of the ordinary seeing of sense perception, we overlook 
what holds good and serves under visible things and between them 
and our vision, the closest of all, namely brightness and its own proper 
transparency, through which the impatience of our seeing hurries and 
must hurry. To experience the closest is the most difficult. In the course 
of our dealings and occupations it is passed over precisely as the easiest. 
Because the closest is the most familiar, it needs no special appropria¬ 
tion. We do not think about it. So it remains what is least worthy of 
thought. The closest appears therefore as if it were nothing. We see 
first, strictly speaking, never the closest but always what is next closest. 
The obtrusiveness and imperativeness of the next closest drives the clos¬ 
est and its closeness out of the domain of experience. This follows from 
the law of proximity. 

This law of proximity is grounded in the law of the beginning. The 
beginning does not at first allow itself to emerge as beginning but in¬ 
stead retains in its own inwardne.ss its beginning character. The begin¬ 
ning then first shows itself in the begun, but even there never immedi¬ 
ately and as such. Even if the begun appears as the begun, its beginning 
and ultimately the entire "essence" of the beginning can still remain 
veiled. Therefore the beginning first unveils itself in what has already 
come forth from it. As it begins, the beginning leaves behind the prox- 



136 


The Fourth Directive [202-203] 


imity of its beginning essence and in that way conceals itself. Therefore 
an experience of what is at the beginning by no means guarantees the 
possibility of thinking the beginning itself in its essence. The first begin¬ 
ning is, to be sure, what is decisive for everything; still, it is not the 
primordial beginning, i.e., the beginning that simultaneously illumi¬ 
nates itself and its essential domain and in that way begins. This begin¬ 
ning of the primordial beginning comes to pass at the end. We know, 
however, neither the character nor the moment of the ultimate end 
of history and certainly not its primordial essence. 

Therefore the completion of the history of the first beginning can 
be a historical sign of the proximity of the primordial beginning, which 
latter includes future history in its proximity. Following the law that 
rules the beginning in its beginning, even the Greeks therefore necessar¬ 
ily overlook what is closest in the essence of dAqdeia. This overlooking 
does not stem from a lack of attention; it is not the consequence of 
negligence or incapacity. On the contrary, it is due precisely to their 
faithfulness to the most primordial experience of the still withdrawing 
beginning that the Greeks overlook the primordiality of the beginning. 
But because, on the other hand, the closest, and it alone, already dwells 
in all that is close, what is closest in the essence of ctAqdeia must then 
be expressed in the speech of the Greeks, even if only incidentally, i.e., 
in the sense of something vaguely glimpsed though not explicitly re¬ 
garded. 

The passage from the Iliad (B, 349ff) elucidated earlier, where Nestor 
speaks of the return of the Greeks and of Zeus's lightning on the right, 
on the occasion of the Greeks' departure for TYoy, revealed an inner 
connection between ipevSoq, distortion, as a concealment but conse¬ 
quently also as a disclosure, and (pai'veiv, showing as letting appear. 
The unconcealed, that which lies in the light of the day, is what appears 
from out of itself, in appearing shows itself, and in this self-showing 
comes to presence (i.e., for the Greeks, "is"). In this way Greek experi¬ 
ence is a revelation of a more original relation between what is uncon¬ 
cealed and what appears. Both are in a certain sense the same, and 
yet again not the same; for in the essence of appearance there is hidden 
an ambiguity that can be decided in more than one way. Appearance 
is founded in a pure shining, which we understand as a radiating light. 
The same appearance, however, is also a self-showing that meets a re¬ 
ception and a perception. Perception can now grasp what shows itself 
merely as what is perceived in the perceiving and can overlook as some¬ 
thing incidental, and ultimately forget, the appearance that dwells in 
the self-showing, i e., appearance in the sense of pure shining and radi¬ 
ating. The unconcealed is thus experienced more and more only in 
its relation to man and in terms of man, i.e., in its character as some¬ 
thing encountered. But it is not thereby necessary that man, even if 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [203-205] 


137 


he thinks the relation of Being to himself emphatically in terms of him¬ 
self, should also posit himself as "subject" in the modern sense and 
declare Being to be his representation. 

The selfhood of man includes, indeed by necessity, selfishness and 
egoism as its excess. These do not at all coincide with the Ego constitut¬ 
ing the essence of "subjectivity," i.e., the rebellious sovereignty of mod¬ 
ern man. But even the essence of the Ego does not consist in the self- 
isolating exclusion of the individual from the rest of beings (this 
exclusion is called "individualism"). Metaphysically thought, the es¬ 
sence of the Ego consists rather in its making every other being some¬ 
thing standing over against it, its object, its over-and-against, its pro¬ 
jected ob-ject. The essence of the Ego (the I) has its distinguishing mark 
in the experience of all beings as objective and as standing over and 
against its representations. Thereby the Ego proceeds to the totality of 
beings and presents this to itself as something to be mastered. Only 
in the reign of subjectivity docs there become historically possible an 
epoch of cosmic discoveries and planetary conquests, for only subjectiv¬ 
ity marks off the essential bounds of an unconditioned objectivity and 
does so ultimately as a claim of its will. The essence of subjectivity, 
namely the Ego of the perceptio and representatio, is so essentially distinct 
from the "egoism" of the individual I that, according to Kant, the es¬ 
sence of the Ego consists precisely in the holding sway of consciousness 
in general as the essence of a self-posited humanity. Selfhood, in the 
sense of subjectivity and Ego, unfolds itself later in many forms, which 
arise historically as nation and people. The concepts of "people" and 
"folk" are founded on the essence of subjectivity and Ego. Only when 
metaphysics, i.e., the truth of beings as a whole, has been founded 
on subjectivity and the Ego do the concepts of "nation" and "people" 
obtain that metaphysical foundation from which they might possibly 
have histoncal relevance. Without Descartes, i.e., without the meta¬ 
physical foundation of subjectivity. Herder, i.e., the foundation of the 
concept of a people, cannot be thought. Whether one can retrospec¬ 
tively establish historiographical relations between these two is a matter 
of indifference, since historiographical relations are always only the fa¬ 
cade, and for the most part the concealing facade, of historical nexuses. 
As long as we know with insufficient clanty the proper essence of sub¬ 
jectivity as the modern form of selfhood, we are prey to the error of 
thinking that the elimination of individualism and of the domination 
of the individual is ipso facto an overcoming of subjectivity. In distinc¬ 
tion to the "individualism" of the nineteenth century, which protected 
the pluralism and the "value" of the unique and had as its counter¬ 
essence the distinctionlessness of the herd, Nietzsche sees the emergence 
of a new form of humanity, characterized by the "typical." 

In a note from the year 1888 (Wille zur Macht, 819) Nietzsche says- 



138 


The Fourth Directive [205-206] 


"The feeling for and the pleasure in the nuance (—the proper moder¬ 
nity), in what is not general, goes counter to the drive that has its plea¬ 
sure and power in the grasp of the typical . . Nietzsche understands 
by "type" the subjectivity that, on the basis of the will to power, is 
installed in unconditioned domination and is hardened in the sense 
of the "will." The "symptom of the strength" of this subjectivity, i.e., 
the sign of the drive toward the type, is "the preference for questionable 
and frightening things " {WzM., 852). Nietzsche is not "preaching" 
here an unbridled morality or a special "philosophy" for the Germans, 
but instead he is thinking, as the thinker he is, beings in their Being. 
He thinks what is in world history, what, because it already is, is only 
coming.' As soon as we cease to interpret Nietzsche's metaphysics ac¬ 
cording to the bourgeois ideas of the end of the nineteenth century, 
and instead conceive it within the historical nexus to which it belongs 
exclusively, i e., on the basis of its relation to the metaphysics of "objec¬ 
tive" idealism and to Western metaphysics as a whole, we recognize 
that Nietzsche's concept of the "superman" manifests the counter¬ 
essence to the "absolute consciousness" of Hegel's metaphysics. But 
we will understand neither if we have not adequately understood the 
essence of subjectivity. 

The form of the essence of subjectivity includes in itself a mode of 
the selfhood of man. But not every way of being a self is necessarily 
subjectivity." As long as we fail to see this, then every time a priority 
is accorded to the self we will run the risk of misinterpreting it as "sub¬ 
jectivity" or even "subjectivism." The usual presentation of Greek soph¬ 
istry and Socratism also fell victim to this superficiality of historiographi¬ 
cal comparison and amalgamation. Now, insofar as Plato's thinking, 
as well as Aristotle's metaphysics, already passed through a confronta¬ 
tion with sophistry and Socratism, the selfhood of man and conse¬ 
quently the ground of man's essence received a peculiar privilege at 
the beginning of metaphysics. This is immediately evident in the way 
beings, as what appears in unconcealedness, are exclusively determined 
in relation to perception (vovg) and to the ipvxq, the essence of "life." 
And that leads finally to the proposition asserted by Aristotle in his 
treatise llepi Vvyiig (F 8, 43Ib21): q ipvxq rd ovia nibq eari . . . 
"The soul (the essence of 'life') is in a certain way the beings . . .'' 
That is, in a certain way the Being of beings, as the perceivedness of 
the perceived, is founded in the "soul." This sounds like a statement 
from Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, according to which the conditions 
of the possibility of experience are simultaneously the conditions of 


1 Nieizsche. op di XIV, WzM n 852 

2 See Sein und Zen, § 64 




§8 Significance of dis-closure [206-207] 


139 


the possibility of the objects of expenence. But Aristotle's thesis only 
sounds like that, Aristotle is not saying that the Being of beings would 
repose in and consist of representedness by a representing Ego, i.e., 
as subject of consciousness and of its self-certainty. Of course, the Being 
of beings, as the Being of what shows itself and appears, is unconcealed¬ 
ness, but unconcealedness still has its essence in physis. 

Admittedly, Aristotle calls genuine being (Met, a 1) rd (pavepajiaia 
navjcov, that which, of all things, is most apparent, in that it has already 
shown itself in advance in all things and everywhere. But rd 
(pavepajjaia ndvitov retains the distinguishing determination id Tfj 
(pvoei (pavepcoTOTa ndvitov (933bl 1), that which appears in such a 
way that its appearance is determined on the basis of self-emergence: 
(pvoiq. 

Accordingly, at the beginning of metaphysics, both are retained: ap¬ 
pearance in the sense of emergence and coming forth and also appear¬ 
ance in the sense of a self-showing to a perception or to a "soul." Here 
is hidden the reason for the peculiarly unsettling transitional character 
that marks metaphysics at its beginning and lets it become what it is; 
on the one hand, with respect to the beginning, the last light of the 
first beginning, and on the other hand, with respect to its continuation, 
the inception of the oblivion of the beginning and the start of its con¬ 
cealment Because the subsequent time interprets Greek thought only 
in terms of later metaphysical positions, i.e., in the light of a Platonism 
or Anstoteleanism, and since it thereby interprets Plato as well as Aris¬ 
totle either in a medieval way, or in a Leibnizian-Hegelian modern way, 
or even in a neo-Kantian way, therefore it is now nearly impossible 
to recall the primordial essence of appearance in the sense of emergence, 
i.e., to think the essence of physis Accordingly, the essential relation 
between (pi')oi(; and dAqdna also remains concealed. To the extent that 
it is ever referred to, it seems very strange. But if signifies a com¬ 
ing forth, an emergence, and nothing that one might mean by ratio 
or "nature," and if, then, (pvoic; is an equiprimordial word for what 
is named by dAqdeia, why then should not Parmenides' didactic poem 
on dAqdna bear the title nepi (pvdFOjq. "On the Coming Forth into 
the Unconcealed”? 

We of today only acknowledge slowly and with difficulty the distort¬ 
ing excessiveness of "nature" as a translation of (pvaiq. But even if we 
do succeed, we are still far from a transformation of experience and 
of thinking that might once more bring us into the proximity of the 
first beginning, in order to be closer to the beginning of the approaching 
beginning. Without having in view the essence of (pvaig, we will not 
see what is closest in d\t']i%in and toward which our thinking is now 
under way. 



140 


The Fourth Directive [ 208 - 209 ] 


b) The fourth directive: the open as the primordial essence of 
unconcealedness. Reference to Being and Time and Sophocles, Aiaq 
V, 646f. Time as letting appear and concealing. Reference to 
Holderlin. Time as "factor" in the modern period. The upsurge of 
the open into unconcealedness. The "identification" of openness 
and freedom. ’AAqdeia as the open of the clearing. 

We shall conclude our elucidation of the essence of aArjdeia by attempt¬ 
ing to follow a fourth directive provided by the translation of aAqdeia 
as "unconcealedness," 

Thinking ahead, we can say that the open holds sway in the essence 
of unconcealedness. The word "open" makes us think first of what 
is not closed off, hence is dis-closed. Thought in this way the open 
proves to be a consequence of an opening up and a disclosing. For 
now, let us leave undecided whether or not the open must be the essen¬ 
tial ground of disclosedness, providing the possibility of unconcealed¬ 
ness in the first place, rather than merely being its result. Prior to all 
that, we need to see that the Greeks did in fact experience within the 
realm of the essence of aAqdeia something that made it necessary for 
them to speak in some way of the open. But nowhere among the Greeks 
do we find the essential concept of the open. On the contrary, we en¬ 
counter in the essential domain of aAqdeia, and of the Greek thinking 
of Being, words and names referring only approximately to what we 
are calling the open. 

A simple dictum from Greek poetry may testify to this. In addition, 
it will again provide us with an opportunity to think in a mystenously 
simple way the essential unity of the fundamental Greek words, a unity 
we have more than once considered in the course of our meditation. 
The dictum names the relation between concealment and disclosure, 
appearance and emergence Thereby it immediately provides the direc¬ 
tive that is to guide our present reflection. The dictum expresses simulta¬ 
neously what could be called a foreword to the saying of the essence 
of Being. 

The dictum deals with "time " In Being and Time, time is experienced 
and named as fore-word for the word "of" Being. The Greek dictum 
on time occurs in Sophocles' tragedy Ai'aq, (V, 646f), and is as follows’ 

anavd' 6 paxpdi; avapidpqioc; ypbvoc 
(pvei i' aSqXa xai (pavevia xpvmriai 

"The broad, incalculable sweep of time lets emerge everything that is not 
open as well as concealing (again) in itself what has appeared " 

Let us consider this dictum starting from the end The last word is 
xpuineeai. Kpvmeadai means to take back into oneself, to hide back 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [209-211] 


141 


and conceal in oneself. This is the way xpovoq, “time," conceals. "Time" 
is primordially for the Greeks in every case only the "right" or "wrong" 
time, the appropnate or inappropriate time. That means each being 
has its time. "Time" is in every case the "time in which" this or that 
occurs; i.e., it is the "time point," which does not mean the "punctual 
now" but "point" in the sense of the place, the locality, to which an 
appearance in its appearing belongs temporally at any "time." "Time" 
is here not a "series" or "sequence" of indifferent "now-points." In¬ 
stead, time is something that in its way bears beings, releasing them 
and taking them back. 

"Time" understood in the Greek manner, \pdvoq, corresponds in es¬ 
sence to Tonoq, which we erroneously translate as "space." Tonoq is 
place, and specifically that place to which something appertains, e.g., 
fire and flame and air up, water and earth below. Just as lonoq orders 
the appurtenance of a being to its dwelling place, so xpovoq regulates 
the appurtenance of the appearing and disappearing to their destined 
"then" and "when." Therefore time is called paxpoq, "broad," in view 
of its capacity, indeterminable by man and always given the stamp of 
the current time, to release beings into appearance or hold them back. 
Since time has its essence in this letting appear and taking back, number 
has no power in relation to it. That which dispenses to all beings their 
time of appearance and disappearance withdraws essentially from all 
calculation. 

The fact that the Greek god who is older than the highest of the 
Olympic gods, the "ancient father" of Zeus, is called "Chronos," "time," 
can be appreciated by us only if we realize that the Greek divinities 
consist in general in a looking and appearing and that "time" is what 
lets appear and conceals. In the securing essence of the immemorial 
god "Chronos" repose the "ancient friends" from whom "all power 
arises" (Holderlin, "Nature and art, or Saturn and Jupiter," IV, 47).' 
So the pnmordial essence of time is essentially remote from number, 
from calculation, and from all "artifices": avapidpqioq. 

Admittedly, already among the Greeks, in Aristotle's Physics, the es¬ 
sence of time was understood precisely on the basis of "number " That 
is certainly food for thought, above all because the Aristotelian determi¬ 
nation of the essence of ypdvochas dominated the Western understand¬ 
ing of time ever since. Not only in the mathematical formulae of modern 
physics but in general in all human comportment towards time, time 
becomes a "factor," i.e , a "worker," that "works" either "against" or 
"for" man, namely "against" or in "favor" of the calculation by means 
of which man makes plans to master beings and secure himself in them. 
In modern terms, time is something man takes into account, and pre- 


1 Holderlin WW (Hellingraih). IV. p 47 




142 


The Fourth Directive [211—212] 


cisely as the empty frame of the progression of occurrences one after 
the other. Everywhere, not only in physics, time is the “parameter," 
i.e., the coordinates along which runs (napa) all measurement 
{peipov) and calculation. Man uses and consumes time like a "factor." 
As a consequence of this disposition, which consumes and uses up, 
man constantly has less and less time in spite of all his time-saving, 
and that is why the saving and economy of time are necessary in even 
the tiniest procedures of technology. Modern man, the subject to whom 
the "world" has become a uniquely uniform "object," consumes even 
time. Modern man therefore always "has" less and less time, because 
he has taken possession of time in advance only as calculable and has 
made time something of which he is obsessed, though he is presumably 
the ruler whose rule masters time. For primordial Greek thinking, on 
the contrary, time, always as dispensing and dispensed time, takes man 
and all beings essentially into its ordering and in every case orders the 
appearance and disappearance of beings. Time discloses and conceals. 

Thus time can xpvrneodai, hide back into itself, only what has ap¬ 
peared: (pavevja. Beings, coming into presence and becoming con¬ 
cealed in absence by the "sweep" of time, are understood here in terms 
of appearance. What appears, however, is what it is only insofar as 
it comes forth and emerges. Something must therefore be present letting 
the appearance emerge. Ovinq, (pveiv (see above Aqdrj —myth) is said 
of the earth, t) yf] (pvei —the earth lets come forth We often, and even 
correctly, translate (pveiv as "growing," but in doing so we must not 
forget to think this "becoming" and "growing" in the Greek manner 
as a coming forth, out of concealedness, of the germ and the root from 
the darkness of the earth into the light of the day Even now we still 
say, though to be sure only as a figure of speech, time will bring it 
out into the light of day; everything needs (in order to come forth) 
its time. The (pveiv of (pvaiq, the letting come forth and the emergence, 
lets what emerges appear in the unconcealed. 

Admittedly, Sophocles does not use the word aXqdeia —unconceal¬ 
edness—in his dictum about time, the time that hides (xpvmeodai) 
and lets come forth {(pvei). Nor does he say that time lets the concealed 
come forth, (pvei rd Aadovea, but instead he says (pvei la dSpAa —time 
lets come forth into appearance that which is determined to appear 
but is not yet dqAov: d-dqAov, the un-open. Corresponding to the un¬ 
open, as the concealed, is the un-concealed, the openly revealed, i.e,, 
what came forth into the open and appeared in the open, The open 
dwells in unconcealedness. The open is that closest that we co-intend 
in the essence of unconcealedness, though without explicitly heeding 
it or genuinely considering it, let alone grasping its essence in advance 
so that the presence of this open could order and guide all our experi¬ 
ence of beings We already know the unconcealed and the disclosing 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [ 212 - 214 ] 143 

(dAqdeq) have an eminent relation to enoq, pvdoq, Adyoc;, i.e., to the 
word. Saying and legend are essentially related to (paivopevov, to that 
which shows itself in unconcealedness. The disclosive utterance in an 
assertion is therefore still for Aristotle dno(paiveodai —a bringing into 
appearance. Instead of dno<paiveodai Aristotle often says, as did Plato 
and the earlier philosophers, dqXovv —to place into the open.' In 
speaking of unconcealedness (ctAtjdeia), (pvatt; (emergence into the un¬ 
concealed), (pai'veodai (appearing and letting appear), xpvnxeodai 
(concealing), and Aavddveiv (being-hidden), what is always named, 
though for the most part only incidentally, is to SqAov, that which 
stands out into the open and therefore is the open. 

The essence of unconcealedness provides a directive toward the open 
and openness. But what are these? Here the Greeks are silent. We find 
ourselves without support or assistance when it becomes necessary to 
reflect on the essence of the open pervading dAqdeia. This reflection 
will seem strange to the ordinary view, especially because it shows that 
the open is by no means first and only a result or consequence of disclo¬ 
sure but is itself the ground and the essential beginning of unconcealed¬ 
ness. For, to disclose, i.e., to let appear in the open, can only be accom¬ 
plished by what gives in advance this open and thus is in itself 
self-opening and thereby is essentially open, or as we may also say, 
is of itself already "free." The still concealed essence of the open as 
the primordial self-opening is "freedom." 

By identifying openness with freedom we are linking it with some¬ 
thing familiar and thus seem to be making the essence of the open 
comprehensible. But in fact this is mere semblance, and is even doubly 
so, insofar as the "identification" of openness and freedom, correctly 
thought of, grounds a still obscure openness in the essence of freedom, 
the origin of which is in turn equally obscure. In all metaphysics, the 
essence of "freedom" is understood in essential relation to the "will," 
and the freedom of the will is understood as the distinguishing mark 
of a power of the soul, i.e., understood in terms of human comport¬ 
ment. But for us now it is a question of thinking the essence of freedom 
in essential unity with the most primordial concept of ctAqdeia, and 
indeed with a view to elucidating the essence of the open. Thereby 
we might grasp the freedom man must first attain, in accord with his 
essence, if he is to be able to let beings be in the open what they are 
as beings. 

The free is the guarantee, the sheltering place, for the Being of beings. 
The open, as the free, shelters and salvages Being. We ordinarily think 
of the open, the free, and the vast as conditions of scattering, dispersion, 
and distraction. The open and its extension into the vastriess of the 


1 Cf. Sein und Zeit, §7, which has to be thought in conjunction with §44 




144 


The Fourth Directive 1214 - 215 ] 


unlimited and limitless are zones without stopping places, where every 
sojourn loses itself in instability. The open provides no shelter or secu- 
nty. The open is rather the place where what is still undetermined and 
unresolved plays out, and therefore it is an occasion for erring and 
going astray. Thus with regard to the open two questions immediately 
arise. In the first place, as originating in primordial freedom, how is 
the open supposed to be the originary essence of unconcealedness? 
Secondly, how can the open be essentially sheltering? 

It cannot be denied that the primordial essence of truth, aAqdeia, 
refers to the essence of the open and of openness. Although the Greeks 
did not explicitly think through and name the open as the essence of 
aAqdeia, yet they experienced it constantly in one regard, namely in 
the essential form of the lighted and the lighting, and this in turn in 
the shining of the light that provides brightness. We had incidentally 
mentioned the open as the lighted when we characterized the Saipoveq 
and the dedoveeq as ones who look and appear in the light, and we 
already indicated the connection between clearing and light. The light 
is the determining radiance, the shining and appearing. "The" light in 
the eminent sense shines as the light of the sun. On the basis of Plato's 
"cave allegory" we can immediately gather the connection between 
sun, light, unconcealedness, and unveiling on the one hand, and be¬ 
tween darkness, shadow, concealedness, veiling, and cave on the other. 

This reference to the essence of aAqdeia in the sense of the open 
of the cleanng and of the light will serve to conclude our elucidation 
of the Greek experience of the essence of truth. Apparently, then, we 
need only take a few more steps in order to "explain" this essence 
of truth in a way that might satisfy even ordinary, i.e., modern, thinking 
and its demands. 


c) Light and looking. The "natural" explanation of truth as 
lighting in terms of the "visual" Greeks, versus the disclosing 
look. The perceptual look. ’AAqdeia: the event in the landscape of 
the evening that conceals the morning, ©edv-opdv and theory. 

The light, understood as brightness, first bestows the possibility of the 
look and therewith the possibility of the encountering look as well as 
the grasping look. Looking is an act of seeing. Seeing is a power of 
the eye. Herewith we seem to reach a point that could entirely explain 
aAqdeia as the essence of truth for the Greeks, i.e,, lighting and the 
open as the essence of truth. The Greeks were, as we say, "visual." 
They grasped the world primarily by the eye, and therefore they "natu¬ 
rally" paid attention to looking and the look. So they had to consider 
light and brightness. From the lighting and brightness and transparency 
{6ia(pavec;) of the light there is only a small step to the lighted and 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [ 215 — 217 ] 145 

the cleanng, i.e., precisely to the open and then to the unconcealed 
as the essential, If we remember the Greeks were visual, and if we 
think of unconcealedness as openness and clearing, then the essential 
priority of aXqdtia becomes understandable at one stroke, This refer¬ 
ence to the basic characteristic of the open in the essence of dAqdeia 
puts us on the path of the “most natural" explanation of dXqdeia. 

The Greek essence of truth, unconcealedness, the open, the lighted, 
the clear, is thus explained by the fact that the Greeks were "visual." 
With this "explanation" we could conclude our discussion of the es¬ 
sence of dXqdeia as experienced by the Greeks. Nevertheless, in order 
to conclude a little more tidily, we must eliminate a minor disturbing 
moment. It is said that the Greeks were visual, and therefore their inter¬ 
pretation of the world was focused on seeing, on the countenance, and 
on the light. But why were the Greeks visual? Are not all people visual? 
Certainly they are, insofar as they have eyes and see. But the familiar 
characterization of the Greeks is supposed to indicate that for them 
the eye played a special role. Again we come back to the question, 
why? One might answer: because there in Greece the light is particu¬ 
larly impressive. But then it would not be the eye as eye but the light 
that predominates and determines the priority of lighting. Besides, the 
power of the light is no less dominating in the land of the Egyptians 
and to a certain degree in the land of the Romans. And there we do 
not find anything resembling the essence of truth in the sense of d\q- 
dfia, But precisely this, one could counter, demonstrates that the Greeks 
were visual to a special degree. It is simply a given fact. It is something 
"ultimate" and, as it were, the "substance" of this humanity. Now, it 
is not at all our intention to deny the "fact" that the Greeks were visual 
or that in their world the light and seeing played a preeminent role. 
Yet the question remains, and in spite of all the "facts" is once more 
to be raised, whether the reference to these facts in the least "explains" 
the essence of dAqdna and whether such an essence at all allows of 
being "explained" by "facts" or anything derived from "facts." We might 
even question still further whether "explaining," with regard to what 
is essential, brings us at all, and ever could, into a relation with what 
is essential in the essence. We are hereby approaching the question 
of the character and the very sense of the meditation we have been 
pursuing on the essence of dAqdna. 

That the Greeks were visual, that they were "eye-people," what does 
this contnbute to an elucidation of the essence of truth as unconcealed¬ 
ness, openness, and clearing? It does not contnbute anything, because 
it cannot have the least significance. That fact can not mean anything, 
because the factual functioning of the eyes does not give any informa¬ 
tion, and cannot give any information, about the relation of man to 
beings. What is just an "eye" without the ability to see? We do not 



146 


The Fourth Directive [ 217 - 218 ] 


see because we have eyes, but we have eyes because we can "see." 
But what does it mean to "see"? We understand it, in a very broad 
sense, as the foundation for all physical, physiological, and aesthetic 
"optics": namely, it is what allows for an immediate encounter with 
beings, things, animals, and other people, in the light. Of what help, 
however, would any light be, no matter how luminous, and what could 
any optical instrument do, no matter how refined and accommodating, 
if the power to see did not itself in advance get a being in sight by 
means of the visual sense and the medium of the light? Just as the 
eye without the ability to see is nothing, so the ability to see, for its 
part, remains an "inability" if it does nor come into play in an already 
established relation of man to visible beings. And how could beings 
be supposed to appear to man, if man did not already relate in his 
essence to beings as beings? And how could such a relation of man 
to beings as such hold sway if man did not stand in a relation to Being? 
If man did not already have Being in view, then he could not even 
think the nothing, let alone experience beings, And how is man sup¬ 
posed to stand in this relation to Being if Being itself does not address 
man and claim his essence for the relation to Being? But what else 
is this relation of Being to the essence of man than the clearing and 
the open which has lighted itself for the unconcealed? If such clearing 
did not come into play as the open of Being itself, then a human eye 
could never become and be what it is, namely the way man looks at 
the demeanor of the encountering being, the demeanor as a look in 
which the being is revealed. Since the primordial essence of truth is 
"unconcealedness" (a-Aqdeia), and since aAqdeia is already in the con¬ 
cealed the open and the self-luminous, therefore the clearing and its 
transparency can altogether appear in the form of the lighting of bright¬ 
ness and of its transparency. Only because the essence of Being is aAq¬ 
deia can the light of the lighting achieve a priority That is why the 
emergence into the open has the character of shining and appearing. 
And that is why the perception of what emerges and is unconcealed 
is a perception of something shining in the light, i.e., it is seeing and 
looking. Only because looking is claimed in this way can the "eye" 
receive a priority. It is not because the eye is "sun-like," but it is because 
the sun as what is radiant itself is of the light and is of the essence 
of aAqdeia, that the eye of man can "look" and can become a sign 
for the relation of man to the unconcealed in general. Because the es¬ 
sence of truth and of Being is aAqdeia, the open, the Greeks could 
use the eye to characterize the essential relation of man to beings (i.e., 
ipvxq, the soul) and could speak of the d/i/ra r^c' ^^e "eye 

of the soul." 

The Greeks also speak of a conversation of "the soul" with itself 
(Aoyoc;), and the essence of man would consist in the Aoyov exeiv. If, 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [ 218 - 220 ] 


147 


consequently, the essence of the "soul" is determined by Adyoc;, and 
indeed in a way that is no less essential than the determination by 
the perceptual look, and if the latter occurs in the lighting of ctAqdeia, 
then the Aeyeiv of the human soul must also be founded by the Aoyot; 
which in its essence is nothing else than dAqdeia.' 

The primordial essence of truth is aAqdeia not because the Greeks 
were visual, but instead the Greeks could only be visual because it is 
aAqdeia that determines the relation of their humanity to Being. This 
and only this, namely that the essence of truth originates as aAqdeia, 
but precisely in such a way as to conceal itself forthwith, is the event 
of the history of the Occident. 

According to this essential origination of aAqdeia, the Occident 
[Abendland] is the not yet decided or delimited landscape of the earth 
upon which an evening [Abend] is descending, which as evening essen¬ 
tially takes its beginning from the dawn and therefore harbors in itself 
the morning of this landscape. Because the essence of truth holds sway 
as aAqdeia, the open and lighted determines what appears therein and 
makes it comply with the essential form of the look that looks into 
the light. In correspondence to this appearing look, the disclosing per¬ 
ception and grasp of beings, i.e., knowledge, is conceived as a looking 
and a seeing. 

The look of Being, which looks into beings, is in Greek dea. The 
grasping look in the sense of seeing is in Greek opacj. To see the encoun- 
tenng look, in Greek deav-opav, is deopaw — deopefv, deopia. The 
word "theory" means, conceived simply, the perceptual relation of man 
to Being, a relation man does not produce, but rather a relation into 
which Being itself first posits man. 

To be sure, when later ages and we of today say "theory" and "theo¬ 
retical," everything primordial has been forgotten. The "theoretical" is 
a product of the human representational subject. The "theoretical" is 
the "merely" theoretical. The "theoretical" must, in order to justify its 
"truth claims" first prove itself by "praxis." Without such proof a rela¬ 
tion to "reality" is denied it. Even where, within certain limits, a signifi¬ 
cance proper to the theoretical is acknowledged, one is calculating that 
a day will arrive in which it could be applied "practically," a view of 
its usefulness that subsequently justifies the poor "merely" theoretical 
comportment as unavoidable. But it is the practical, i.e., success and 
performance, that is the standard and the justification of the theoretical. 
Already four decades ago the Americans established this doctrine as 
the philosophy of "pragmatism." By this "philosophy" the Occident 
will neither be redeemed nor saved. The Greeks, however, who alone 


1 On (he Logos of Heracliius. see Gesamtausgabe Bd 55. pp 185-402, as well as 
the epilogue of the editor, ll. p 405 




148 


The Fourth Directive [ 220 - 221 ] 


are the custodians of the beginning of the Occident, experienced imme¬ 
diately in decjpi'a an essential relation to the dedoviec;, to the deiov, 
and to the Saipoviov. Therefore the Greeks do not first need to impute 
to decjpi'a a practical "value" in order to justify its "truth claims" or 
in order to justify it over and against the suspicion that it is something 
"merely" theoretical, devalued as something "merely" abstract running 
about like some horror. With such a removal of the "theoretical," as 
the "abstract," from dea, from the look of Being, can we then be sur¬ 
prised at "atheism," which circulates not only among "freethinkers" 
and within the "atheistic movement"? 

That the basic Greek experience of Being is decjpia does not testify 
first and foremost to the priority of seeing and looking but testifies above 
all to the primordial holding sway of the essence of dAqdeia, in which 
there dwells something like the clearing, the lighted, and the open. 
Insofar as we follow this directive from the essence of unconcealedness 
and think the open, our meditation on the essence of dAqdeia is indeed 
not at its end but is only now first brought to its beginning. 


d) The open at the beginning of the meditation on the word 
dAqdeia. Essential thinking: the leap into Being. Unconcealed 
beings in the security of the groundlessness of the open (the free) 
of Being. The concealment of the decision of the bestowal on man 
of unconcealedness in the securing open. The entitlement, through 
the bestowal of Being, to see the open: a historical beginning. The 
alienation of man from the open. 

The beginning requires of us, whose history has proceeded from the 
beginning, a reflection on the essence of the "open." In naming "the 
open" and using the word "openness," we seem to be representing 
something known and understandable. But, on the contrary, everything 
is blurred in the indeterminate—that is, unless we now take the word 
"open" senously and think it exclusively within the essential nexus 
our meditation on the essence of dAqdeia has brought closer to us. 
We shall thus use the locution "the open" only in its indissoluble essen¬ 
tial unity with dAqdeia and with the essence of dAqdeia as primordially 
experienced 

In this context, the open is the light of the self-luminous. We name 
it "the free" and its essence "freedom." "Freedom" has a primordial 
sense here, alien to metaphysical thinking. We might be inclined to 
elucidate the essence of freedom, thought here as the essence of the 
open, on the basis of the traditional delimitation of the various concepts 
of freedom. For we would be tempted to draw closer to the essence 
of what we are calling "the open" by approaching it gradually through 
our ordinary representations. 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [221-2231 


149 


A way that is open we call free. Entrance and passage are granted. 
These show themselves as spaciousness. What can be traversed is 
known to us as the spaciousness of spaces, as their dimensional essence, 
an essence we also ascribe to time—by speaking of a "span of time" 
for instance. This represents what we presumably first encounter in 
naming the "open": an unclosed and unoccupied extension prepared 
for the reception and distribution of objects. 

Yet the open in the sense of the essence of ctAqdeia does not mean 
either space or time as usually intended, nor their unity, space-time, 
because all that already had to borrow its openness from the openness 
holding sway in the essence of disclosedness. Similarly, everywhere that 
something is "free of , , in the sense of "exempt from , , .," or is 
"free for , , ." in the sense of "ready to , . .," a freedom already comes 
to presence out of the freedom that first releases even space-time as 
an "open," traversable, extension and spread. The "free of" and the 
"free for" already require a clearing in which a detachment and a dona¬ 
tion constitute a more original freedom that cannot be grounded on 
the freedom of human comportment. 

Hence we will never arrive at the open, as the essence of aletheia, 
simply by stretching the open in the sense of the "extended" or in the 
sense of the "free" as commonly understood, stretching it into a gigantic 
container encompassing everything. Strictly speaking, the essence of 
the open reveals itself only to a thinking that attempts to think Being 
itself in the way that it is presaged to our destiny in the history of 
the West as what is to be thought in the name and essence of aAqdeia. 
Every person in history knows Being immediately, though without ac¬ 
knowledging it as such. But as undeniable as is the immediacy of this 
knowledge of Being, that is also how rarely the thinking of Being suc¬ 
ceeds or even commences. It is not that this thinking is difficult and 
would require special arrangements in order to be carried out. If we 
may speak of a difficulty here, it consists in the fact that to think Being 
is very simple, but that the simple is for us the most arduous. 

To think Being does not require a solemn approach and the preten¬ 
sion of arcane erudition, nor the display of rare and exceptional states 
as in mystical raptures, reveries, and swoonings. All that is needed is 
simple wakefulness in the proximity of any random unobtrusive being, 
an awakening that all of a sudden sees that the being "is." 

The awakening for this "it is" of a being, and above all the remaining 
awake for the "it is," and the watching over the clearing of beings—that 
constitutes the essence of essential thinking. The "it is" of beings. Being, 
shows itself, if it does show itself, in each case only "suddenly"—in 
Greek E^ai<pvqi;. i.e., e^a<pavqq, the way that something irrupts into 
appearance, from non-appearance. To this essentially unmediated and 
immediate irruption of Being into beings, which in turn only then ap- 



150 


The Fourth Directive [223-224] 


pear as beings, there corresponds on the part of man a comportment 
that no longer adverts to beings but suddenly thinks Being. To think 
Being requires in each instance a leap, a leap into the groundless from 
the habitual ground upon which for us beings always rest. It is as the 
groundless that the free comes to light, and that is how we name it, 
provided we think nothing more of a being than its "it is." 

This genuine thinking occurs "by leaps," for it ignores the bridges 
and railings and ladders of explanation, which always only derives be¬ 
ings from beings, since it remains on the "soil" of "facts." This ground 
is full of cracks. It never bears. For every being to which we adhere 
to the exclusion of all else bears only as a consequence of an oblivion 
of Being, wherein nevertheless the being is present. Being, however, 
is not a ground but is the groundless. It is called such because it is 
primordially detached from a "soil" and "ground" and does not require 
them. Being, the "it is" of a being, is never autochthonous in beings, 
as if Being could be extracted from beings and then stood upon them 
as on its ground. It is only beings in relation to beings that are autoch¬ 
thonous. Being, the never autochthonous, is the groundless. This seems 
to be a lack, though only if calculated in terms of beings, and it appears 
as an abyss in which we founder without support in our relentless pur¬ 
suit of beings. In fact we surely fall into the abyss, we find no ground, 
as long as we know and seek a ground only in the form of a being 
and hence never carry out the leap into Being or leave the familiar 
landscape of the oblivion of Being. This leap requires no digressions 
or formalities. For everywhere and always and in the closest proximity 
to the most inconspicuous beings there already dwells the openness 
of the possibility of explicitly thinking the "it is" of beings as the free, 
in the clearing of which beings appear as unconcealed. The open, to 
which every being is liberated as if to its freedom, is Being itself. Every¬ 
thing unconcealed is as such secured in the open of Being, i.e., in the 
groundless. 

The groundless, originally freed from every ground and its cracks, 
is what secures primordially, though to be sure it does not secure in 
the sense of a sanctuary man might hunt out somewhere within beings 
and arrange for himself. The security of the open does not provide a 
place of refuge through which man could acquit himself of his essence. 
The open itself secures the essential abode of man, provided man and 
only he is that being to whom Being illuminates itself. Being, as the 
open, secures in itself every kind of unconcealedness of beings. Hence, 
in securing, the secure open also conceals the primordial decision by 
which Being bestows on man unconcealedness, i.e., the truth of beings 
as a whole. The character of this bestowal hides and secures the way 
historical man belongs within the bestowal of Being, i.e., the way this 
order entitles him to acknowledge Being and to be the only being 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [224-2261 


151 


among all beings to see the open. A decision on this entitlement is 
rarely made. It is made every time the essence of truth, the openness 
of the open, is determined primordially. And that is a beginning of 
history. Indeed, histoncal man, insofar as he is, always belongs within 
the bestowal of Being. Man, and only he, constantly sees into the open, 
in the sense of the free, by which the "it is" liberates each being to 
itself and on the basis of this liberation looks at man in his guardianship 
of the open. Although man and only he constantly sees into the open, 
i.e., encounters beings in the free of Being, in order to be struck by 
them, yet he is not thereby already entitled to bring Being itself explicitly 
into its ownmost, i.e., to bring it into the open (the free), i.e., to poetize 
Being, to think it, and to say it. Because only unconcealed beings can 
appear and do appear in the open of Being, man adheres, at first unwit¬ 
tingly and then constantly, to these beings. He forgets Being and in 
such forgetting learns nothing more than the overlooking of Being and 
alienation from the open. 


e) The open in the form of the unrestrained progression of beings. 
The open: the free of the clearing. The "open" of the "creature" in 
Rilke's eighth Duino Elegy. Reference to Schopenhauer and 
Nietzsche. The exclusion of the animal from the strife between 
unconcealedness and concealedness. 

The excitability of what is alive. 

Being, from whose bestowal man cannot withdraw, even in the most 
extreme oblivion of Being, does, however, flow away from man into 
the indeterminate totality of beings as a consequence of his alienation 
from aAqdeia. In this way Being is identified without distinction with 
beings or else is cast aside as an empty concept. The distinction of all 
distinctions and the beginning of all distinguishing, i.e., the distinction 
between Being and beings, is then completely effaced and with human 
assistance is rejected without misgivings into heedlessness through a 
disregard for what is properly to be thought, rejected in the uncanny 
manner of oblivion and thoughtlessness. But Being remains—in the 
hardly considered manner of beings as a whole—and obtains its sense 
from an interpretation based in every case, though in vanous ways, 
on the privileged domain of beings. "Being" becomes a mere word- 
sound concealing what has withdrawn and been closed off, whereas 
it is precisely the opening open. 

Beings proceed from and into beings. Only this progression "is," but 
it "is" only with the oblivion of the "is" itself and its essence. This 
unlimited progression of beings, one after the other and one into the 
other, counts as "Being." This unlimited progression of beings into be¬ 
ings refers then to the "open," in the sense in which we speak of "open 



152 


The Fourth Directive [226-227] 


water" when we are on the high seas and all borders of land disappear. 

This is how Rilke, in the eighth Duino elegy, understands "the open." 
The "open" is for him the constant progression by beings themselves, 
from beings to beings within beings. The open as the unlimited progres¬ 
sion of beings remains bound to this and so is chained to the ground. 
The open of the unrestrained progression of beings never arrives at 
the free of Being, and it is precisely this free that the "creature" never 
sees; for the capacity to see it constitutes what is essentially distinct 
about man and consequently forms the unsurmountable essential 
boundary between animal and man. "The open" in the sense of the 
unceasing progression of beings into beings and "the open" in the sense 
of the free of the clearing of Being in distinction from all beings are 
verbally the same, but in what the words name they are so different 
that no oppositional formulation could suffice to indicate the gap be¬ 
tween them. For oppositions, even the most extreme, still require one 
same domain in which to be posed against each other. Precisely this 
is missing here. The metaphysics lying at the foundation of the biolo- 
gism of the nineteenth century and of psychoanalysis, namely the meta¬ 
physics of the complete oblivion of Being, is the source of an ignorance 
of all laws of Being, the ultimate consequence of which is an uncanny 
hominization of the "creature," i.e., the animal, and a corresponding 
animalization of man. This is an assertion about the metaphysical foun¬ 
dation of a poetizing, an assertion carried out from the standpoint of 
thinking. 

It could then be objected that this is to hale poetry in an unauthorized 
way before the court of philosophy. If philosophy and poetry were sim¬ 
ply two different human occupations, existing each in itself and distinct 
by their very essence, then what we have been saying could be con- 
derrmed as nonsense. But what if the essence of thinking and the es¬ 
sence of poetizing were to receive again their originary entitlements! 
And what if this could only occur insofar as the binding character of 
the word and of speech had to be decided primordially and had to 
be taken into human care? Here our concern is only to block the danger 
of a thoughtless confusion of similar verbal sounds. The following re¬ 
marks on Rilke's poetry must be understood within the limits of this 
intention. 

What Rilke, especially in the eighth of his Duino elegies, calls "the 
open" has only the sound and the vocalization in common with what 
the thinking of the essence of dAqdeia conceives in the word "open." 
A brief elucidation of what Rilke says about the "open" can help us 
consider more steadfastly the "open" as thought within the essential 
domain of aAqdeta, by decisively setting it off against the words of 
Rilke. It will also serve to make our meditation on aAqdeta more pre¬ 
cise. 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [227-229] I 53 

Rilke speaks of the "open" especially in the eighth of his Duino ele¬ 
gies, dedicated, significantly, to Rudolf Kassner. It is not our intention 
to present a comprehensive interpretation of this elegy, for that is not 
necessary. What is necessary is only an unequivocal indication of how 
Rilke's word about the "open" is distinct in all respects from the "open" 
as essentially connected to aAqdeia and to thoughtful questioning. The 
eighth Duino elegy begins: 

With all eyes the creature secs 

the open. Only our eyes are 

reversed and placed wholly around creatures 

as traps, around their free exit 

What is outside we know from the animal's 

visage alone 

The first verses of the elegy immediately say to whom it is given 
to see "the open" and to whom it is not. The eyes of the "creature" 
and "our" eyes, i.e., human eyes, are opposed in this respect. What 
then does "creature" mean here? Creatura, from creare, means "what 
is made." Creator is the maker. Creatio, creation, is a biblical-Christian 
fundamental determination of beings. Omne ens est qua ens creatum,' 
with the exception of the uncreated creator himself, the summum ens. 
Creatura in the sense of ens creatum therefore includes man. According 
to the biblical narrative of creation, man is the creatura formed last. 
Thus creatura means "creation," i.e., the created world as a whole, in 
which man is included as the "crown of creation." It is in this sense 
that the word creatura occurs in the famous medieval sequentia, Dies 
irae, dies ilia, a poem written by Thomas of Celano in the first half 
of the thirteenth century He is the one who also wrote the celebrated 
biography of St. Francis of Assisi. 

The fourth strophe of the Dies irae, which perhaps some of you have 
heard in Verdi's composition, is as follows- 

Mors stupebit et natura 
cum resurget creatura 
ludicanti responsura 

Death benumbs all that emerges 
when creatures rise 
to answer to their judge 

Now if Rilke places "creatures" in opposition to man, and this opposi¬ 
tion is the exclusive theme of the eighth elegy, then the word "crea¬ 
tures" cannot mean creatura in the sense of the whole of creation. The 


1 -'Every being, as a being, is someihing made '—TV 


154 


The Fourth Directive [229-230] 


unambiguous delimitation of this word in Rilke's language demands 
an interpretation of the "Duino elegies" as unitary, and specifically in 
their cormection with the "Sonnets to Orpheus," which often are still 
farther reaching. But now is not the occasion to attempt it, and, in 
addition, the "hermeneutic presuppositions" are still lacking, and they 
must be drawn from Rilke's poetry itself. 

The word "creatures" in Rilke's poetry refers to creatures in the 
stricter sense, i.e., "living beings," excluding man. This use of the word 
"creature" and "created being" does not refer to the creation of the 
creator, in the manner of Christian faith, but instead "creature" and 
"created being" are names for the living beings that, in distinction from 
the living being endowed with reason, man, are peculiarly "helpless" 
and "wretched." The "creature" is above all the "animal."' Once more 
it should be emphasized that "creature" is not being distinguished here 
from the creator and therefore is not put into relation to God by means 
of such a distinction. Instead, the creature is the a-rational living being 
in distinction from the rational. But Rilke does not take the "a-rational 
creature" according to the usual view, as lower, i.e., less potent, com¬ 
pared to the higher, more potent, human being. Rilke inverts the rela¬ 
tion of the power of man and of "creatures" (i.e., animals and plants). 
This inversion is what is poetically expressed by the elegy. The inversion 
of the relation in rank of man and animal is carried out with regard 
to that which both these "living beings" are respectively capable of 
in terms of the "open." The "open" is accordingly that which pervades 
both and all beings. Is it therefore Being itself? To be sure. So everything 
hinges on this, that we reflect on the "sense" in which the Being of 
beings is expenenced and spoken of here. The "open" is not without 
relation to aAqdeia, if this is the still hidden essence of Being. How 
could it be otherwise? Yet the "open" according to the word of Rilke 
and the "open" thought as the essence and truth of aAqdeia are distinct 
in the extreme, as far apart as the beginning of Western thought and 
the completion of Western metaphysics—and nevertheless they pre¬ 
cisely belong together—the same. 


1 See the "little" creature, the bug, and the "great" bird, the bat See letter to L. 
Salome 1 III, 1912, from Duino "animal" and "angel" (R M Rilke. Bnefe aus den Jahren 
1907 zu 1914 Ed Ruth Sieber-Rilke and Carl Sieber, Leipzig 1933 Letter to Lou Andreas 
Salom^ from Duino on March l, 1912, p 221ff, especially p 212 ) 

For Rilke, human "consciousness," reason, ddyoc, is precisely the liimtation that makes 
man less potent than the animal Are we then supposed to turn into "animals"? See 
letter from Muzot on August 11, 1924, p 282- "Counierweights " See The Naming of 
the Birds, the Child, the Beloved (Rainer Mana Rilke, Briefe aus Muzot Ed. Ruth Sieber- 
Rilke and Carl Sieber Leipzig 1935 Leuer from Muzot to Nora Purtscher-Wydenbruk 
on August 11, 1924, p 277ff) 




§8 Significance of dis-closure [230-231] 


155 


With all eyes the creature sees 
the open. Only our eyes 


do not see the open, not immediately. Man sees the open so little that 
he is in need of the animal in order to see it. The fifth and sixth verses 
say clearly; 

What is outside we know from the animal's 

visage alone . . 

What Rilke means by the open cannot be understood or even prop¬ 
erly questioned unless we see clearly that the poet is making a distinc¬ 
tion between the animal or a-rational living being on the one side and 
man on the other. Guardini, on the contrary, interprets this elegy as 
if, on the basis of the relation of the "creature"—we should say em 
creatum —to the "open," the poem is a sort of proof for the existence 
of a creating God. 

The opposition of ammal and man, a-rational and rational living 
being, is a distinction whose primordial form is to be sought among 
the Greeks. We are already familiar with this distinction from our previ¬ 
ous remarks. Man is accordingly to ^wov Aoyov £jov, that which 
emerges out of itself and in this emerging, and for its relation to the 
emerged, "has the word." The "animal," on the contrary, is that self- 
emergent to which the word is denied—^wov d-Aoyov. The essence 
of speech, however, is for the Greeks and still for Plato and Aristotle 
TO ano<paiveodai —the letting appear of the unconcealed as such, which 
both philosophers express as to SqAovv, the revealing of the open. Be¬ 
cause he has the word, man, and he alone, is the being that looks 
into the open and sees the open in the sense of the aAqdeq. The animal, 
on the contrary, does not see the open, never does, not with a single 
one of all its eyes. Now the start of Rilke's eighth elegy says exactly 
the opposite. Does Rilke thereby bring about a reversal of the Western 
metaphysical determination of man and animal in their relation to the 
open? 

The problem is that, as a fundamental condition of the essence of 
a reversal ("revolution"), whatever it is with respect to which the rever¬ 
sal takes place must remain the same and must be held fast as the 
same. And in the present case this condition does not obtain. For the 
open meant by Rilke is not the open in the sense of the unconcealed. 
Rilke knows and suspects nothing of dAqdeia, no more than Nietzsche 
does. Accordingly, Rilke is bound within the limits of the traditional 
metaphysical determination of man and animal. Specifically, Rilke takes 
over the form of this determination that arose in the modern age and 



156 


The Fourth Directive [231-233] 


was solidified in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries: from the Greek 
Aoyov exov to the animal rationale. This essential determination 
of man as the “rational living being" is just as distant from the Greek 
one as veritas and certitudo are from aAqdeia. As animal rationale, man 
is the “animal" that calculates, plans, turns to beings as objects, repre¬ 
sents what is objective and orders it. Man comports himself everywhere 
to objects, i.e., to what stands over and against him. This implies man 
himself is the “subject," the being that, positing itself on itself, disposes 
of its objects and in that way secures them for itself. Rilke always thinks 
of man in this modern metaphysical sense. That current metaphysical 
conception of man is the presupposition for Rilke's poetic attempt to 
interpret the essence of man in the sense of modern biological meta¬ 
physics. Man is the living being that, by way of representation, fastens 
upon objects and thus looks upon what is objective, and, in looking, 
orders objects, and in this ordering posits back upon himself the ordered 
as something mastered, as his possession. 

The concluding part of the elegy expresses all this unequivocally, and 
thereby attests that the distinction between man and animal, or more 
precisely the interpretation of the human being on the basis of the ani¬ 
mal, is the all-encompassing theme of the poem: 

And we' spectators always and everywhere, 
to whom all is turned and never out there! 

We are flooded with it. We order it. It breaks down 
We order it again and we break down ourselves. 

The decisive words of these verses resound: “... and never out there!" 
—i.e., never into the "open" the “creatures" "see with all their eyes," 
for we can know about the "out there" and about what is “outside" 
"from the animal's visage alone." What does Rilke then mean by the 
"open"? According to the obvious meaning, when we think of the 
"open," we think of something opened versus something closed. And 
what is open and opened is "a space." The open refers to the essential 
domain of space even if we think of it as what has been brought into 
the light, in the sense of the disclosed and unconcealed. On the path 
of the thinking that thinks aAqdeia in its essence we will arrive at 
the point at which we will have to ask about the relation between 
the unconcealed and space. Must we think the unconcealed on the 
basis of the essence of what is spatial, or is what is spatial and all space 
founded in the essence of aAqdeia as primordially expenenced? In any 
case, the open refers to what is spatial. Rilke's talk about the "never 
out there" and the "what is outside" also refers to this domain. More¬ 
over, the elegy says: 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [233-234] 


157 


We never have, not even for one single day, 

the pure space before us in which the flowers 

infinitely emerge 

"Infinitely" here means "endlessly," "without stopping at a limit," 
and also means "as a whole." "Emerge," of course, does not refer here 
to what the Greeks think by (pveiv but means the "mergence" through 
which, for example by dissolving sugar in water, the emergent is merged 
and assumed up into the whole of the air and all cosmic relations 
This e-merging is possible because there is nothing standing over and 
against the "living being" (plant or animal) as object, turning the living 
being back on itself and forcing it into re-flection. The all-determining 
and all-encompassing basic meaning of the word "open" for Rilke is 
the limitless, the infinite, wherein living beings breathe and unrestrain¬ 
edly dissolve into the irresistible causal nexuses of nature, in order to 
float in this infinity In accordance with that limitless realm, Rilke names 
the animal "the free animal." To what extent Rilke can say; "With all 
eyes the creature sees the open," and to what extent "the open" is 
"so deep in the face of the animal," that is what the poet must justify 
poetically. 

We need to clarify first of all the meaning of "seeing" here. Rilke 
says of "our eyes" that they would be "reversed." They do not go away 
into the objectless domain, but instead, in the very representing of the 
object, they are doubled back by that object onto themselves in the 
opposite direction. If our eyes therefore look at a creature, it is caught 
as an object by our representing; the "free exit" of the look of the crea¬ 
ture into the open is suspended and distorted by our objectification. 
Our eyes are "traps" for the look of the animal, traps which catch its 
look and hold it fast. These traps close, occlude, and debar the open, 
the meaning of which is expressed most readily in the term "open 
water." This is reached when all borders of land have disappeared. The 
open is the absence of borders and limits, the objectless, not thought 
as lack but as onginal whole of reality, in which the creature is immedi¬ 
ately admitted and let free. 

Man, on the contrary, is forced into a relation to objects, with himself 
as the subject, a relation that posits the whole of what Rilke calls the 
open and at the same time occludes it whenever this relation anses. 
According to Rilke the ammal sees more than man does, for the animal's 
gaze is not trammeled by any objects but can go on infinitely, in some 
unknown way, into the objectless. The animal "has before itself" the 
limitless. It never encounters a limit on its path, hence not even death. 
The animal is "free from death" as it goes on into the limitless; its 
advance is never doubled back, as is the case with human representing. 



158 


The Fourth Directive [234-236] 


and it never sees what is behind itself. The limitless as a whole can 
also be called "God" in a loose way of speaking. So in this elegy Rilke 
says: 

the free animal 

has its perishing constantly behind itself, 

and in front of itself God, and when it moves it moves 

m eternity, just as wells do. 

This all sounds very strange and yet is only a poetic form of the 
popular biological metaphysics of the end of the nineteenth century. 
There, and in fact ever since Descartes, man's representing is called 
a consciousness of objects, one that is conscious of itself and is reflected 
onto itself. And so the comportment of the animal is unselfconscious 
and in that sense is an unconscious pressing and driving of the instincts 
out into a direction not "objectively" determined. 

The priority of the unconscious over consciousness corresponds to 
the priority of the free animal over the imprisoned essence of man. 
The spirit of Schopenhauer's philosophy, mediated by Nietzsche and 
the doctrines of psychoanalysis, looms behind this poetry. Although 
Nietzsche's metaphysics with regard to the doctrine of the will to power 
remains outside the compass of Rilke's poetry, there still holds sway 
the one decisive common element; the essence of man as conceived 
on the basis of the essence of the animal. Here it is poetized, there 
thought. From a purely metaphysical viewpoint, i.e., with regard to 
the interpretation of beings as rational or irrational, the domain of 
Rilke's basic poetic expenence is not at all distinct from the basic posi¬ 
tion of Nietzsche's thinking. Both are as remote as possible from the 
essence of truth as aXqdeia, just as was the metaphysics of the modern 
and medieval periods. Yet modern metaphysics, in unity with medieval- 
Christian metaphysics, reposes on the same ground, namely the Roman 
transformation of the metaphysics of Plato and Aristotle, and so it is 
easy to see in Rilke's poetry the last offshoot of modern metaphysics, 
in the sense of a secularized Christianity, and to show that the secula¬ 
rized is precisely only an epiphenomenon of the original Christian phe¬ 
nomenon. Such an interpretation makes Rilke's poetry appear to be 
some sort of derailed Christianity, badly in need of succor, and such 
apologetics risks flying in the face of the expressed word and will of 
the poet. 

Now, we could reply that we are not interested in a Christian apolo¬ 
getic exploitation of the poetry of Rilke. We also reject any attempt 
to apply to poetry the measuring rod of a "philosophy." We adhere 
only to the poetical-artistic word. This is certainly an authentic attitude 
and one that does justice to the poet. But it leaves one question unasked. 



§8 Significance of dis-closure [236-237] 


159 


namely, to what does the poetical word properly oblige us? This ques¬ 
tion has its ground in a still more essential question: which truth is 
proper to poetry as poetry? The mere appeal to personal lived experi¬ 
ences and impressions, which is implied in the appeal to the poet him¬ 
self as the ultimate support of the validity of his word, is here too little, 
i.e., it is nothing at all in an age in which not only the being or non- 
being of a people is to be decided, but where, prior to that, the essence 
and the truth of being and nonbeing themselves, and nothing less, are 
at stake. In this way it could be more important, i.e., more objective, 
to insert Rilke's poetry into the tradition of Christian consciousness 
rather than deliver it over to the subjective "experiences" of a perplexed 
individual. 

Our thinking would be too narrow and too oblique if we were to 
defend the view that by referring to the "open" in Rilke we are measur¬ 
ing his poetry against the yardstick of philosophical concepts, in order 
to judge it or even condemn it according to that measure. To be sure, 
Rilke's word about the "open" would then be brought into relation 
with the essential sphere of dAqdeia. The question is whether this is 
only a so-called philosophical concept or whether in the course of our 
reflection it has become clear that aAqdeia names an event in whose 
compass even Rilke's word about the "open" belongs, just as does every 
occidental word that speaks of Being and truth, a speaking that may 
still experience and know this event or long since have forgotten its 
last tremors. 

There is, of course, a gaping abyss between what Rilke names the 
open and "the open" in the sense of the unconcealedness of beings. 
The "open" that dwells in dAqdeia first lets beings emerge and come 
to presence as beings. Man alone sees this open. More specifically, man 
gets a glimpse of this open while comporting himself, as he always 
does, to beings, whether these beings are understood in the Greek sense 
as what emerges and comes to presence, or in the Christian sense as 
ens creatum, or in the modern sense as objects. In his comportment 
to beings, man in advance sees the open by dwelling within the opening 
and opened project of Being. Without the open, which is how Being 
itself comes to presence, beings could be neither unconcealed nor con¬ 
cealed. Man and he alone sees into the open—though without behold¬ 
ing it. Only the essential sight of authentic thinking beholds Being itself. 
But even there the thinker can behold Being only because he as man 
has already glimpsed it. 

The animal, on the contrary, does not glimpse or see into, and cer¬ 
tainly does not behold, the open in the sense of the unconcealedness 
of the unconcealed. Therefore neither can an animal relate to the closed 
as such, no more than it can comport itself to the concealed. The animal 
is excluded from the essential domain of the strife between uncon- 



160 


The Fourth Directive [237-239] 


cealedness and concealedness. The sign of this essential exclusion is 
that no animal or plant "has the word." 

This reference to the exclusion of the animal from the essential do¬ 
main of unconcealedness introduces us to the enigmatic character of 
all living beings. For the animal is related to his circle of food, prey, 
and sex in a way essentially different from the way the stone is related 
to the earth upon which it lies In those living things characterized 
as plant or animal we find the peculiar arousal of excitability, by which 
the living being is "excited," i e., stirred to an emerging into a circle 
of stimulatability on the basis of which it draws other living things 
into the circle of its activity. No excitability or stimulatability of plants 
and animals ever brings them into the free in such a way that what 
is excited could ever let the exciting "be" what it is even merely as 
exciting, not to mention what it is before the excitation and without 
it. Plant and animal are suspended in something outside of themselves 
without ever being able to "see" either the outside or the inside, i.e., 
to have it stand as an aspect unconcealed in the free of Being. And 
never would it be possible for a stone, no more than for an airplane, 
to elevate itself toward the sun in jubilation and to move like a lark, 
which nevertheless does not see the open. What the lark "sees," and 
how it sees, and what it is we here call "seeing" on the basis of our 
observation that the lark has eyes, these questions remain to be asked. 
In fact, an original poetizing capacity would be needed to surmise what 
is concealed to the living being, a poetic capacity to which more and 
higher things are charged, and more essential things (since they are 
genuinely essential), versus a mere hominization ot plants and animals 
But in metaphysics man too is experienced as a living thing and as 
an "animal" in a larger sense, on the basis of reasons referring back 
to the way Being itself primordially reveals itself. 

Since, in metaphysics, man is experienced and thought of as the ra¬ 
tional animal, animality is then interpreted, against the measuring rod 
of rationality, as what is irrational and without reason, i.e , interpreted 
against human intellectuality as what is instinctual. In this way, in meta¬ 
physics and in its scientilic repercussions, the mystery of the living being 
goes unheeded, for living beings are either exposed to the assault of 
chemistry or are transferred to the field of "psychology." Both presume 
to seek the riddle of life They will never find it; not only because every 
science adheres only to the penultimate and must presuppose the ulti¬ 
mate as the first, but also because the riddle of life will never be found 
where the mystery of the living being has already been abandoned. 

Since Rilke's poetry, too, neither experiences nor respects the essential 
limits between the mystery of the living being (plant or animal) and 
the mystery of the historical being, i.e., man, his poetical words never 
attain the mountain height of a historically foundational decision It 



§9 Looking of Being into the open [239-240] 


161 


is aimost as if in this poetry there is operative an uniimited and ground- 
iess homini/ation of the animai, by which the animai, with respect 
to the originai experience of beings as a whoie, is even raised above 
man and becomes in a certain way a “super-man": 

What is outside we know from the animal's 

visage alone . 

Who are they who speak here in the “we"? The “we" are moderns 
of modern metaphysics, a humanity that, as regards an essential experi¬ 
ence of Being, has erred into the dead end of the oblivion of Being. 

Rilke's poetry often relates to contemporary man with much serious¬ 
ness and care, though with no less an amount of confusion, thoughtless¬ 
ness, and flight. Rilke relishes word-forms but does not consider the 
word. He talks thoughtlessly about the “open" and does not question 
what the significance might be of the openness of the open, whether 
it only refers to an endless progression of unlimited objects or whether 
in the word of the “open" unconcealedness is thought, the uncon¬ 
cealedness that first releases objects into an objectivity as the free, with¬ 
out which not even the nothing could rise up in its excessiveness and 
brandish its menace. 

“What is outside" and what "is" at all, be it “outside" or “inside," 
or in no “space," we only know on the basis of a knowledge of Being, 
which itself comes to presence as the free, and in its clearing beings 
find an access to unconcealedness and thereby an elevation to appear¬ 
ance, and thereby the order of presencing. 


§9 0ed — ’AAqdeia. The looking of Being into the open lighted by it. 
The directive within the reference to the word of Parmenides: the 
thinker's journey to the home of dAqdeia and his thinking out to¬ 
ward the beginning. The saying of the beginning in the language of 

the Occident. 


We might now perhaps be able to see some things more clearly. The 
open holding sway in the essence of dAqdna is difficult to behold not 
only because it is the closest but because it illuminates and thereby 
first bestows the closest, all that is close, and the far as well. 

But this difficulty in beholding the open is only a sign that what 
could come within our essential regard might also be deprived by us 
of its arrival, due to our lacking the entitlement for that which has 
already bestowed itself on us as Being itself but which thereby also 
withdraws ever anew, without our surmising that event. 



162 


The Fourth Directive [240-242] 


Nevertheless, we can now perhaps think and retain this one simple 
thing, namely: d\i']dna is the looking of Being into the open that is 
lighted by it itself as it itself, the open for the unconcealedness of all 
appearance Could what has such an essence be a mere “concept"? 
The endeavor of our entire foregoing rellection has been nothing else 
than to bring us to a thoughtful experience of this astonishing question. 

’AAqdaa is drd, goddess—but indeed only for the Greeks and even 
then only for a few of their thinkers. The truth a goddess for the Greeks 
in the Greek sense. Indeed 

But what is the essence of truth for us? We do not know, because 
we neither comprehend the essence of truth nor do we comprehend 
ourselves, and we do not know who we ourselves are. Perhaps this 
double ignorance about the truth and about ourselves is itself one and 
the same. But it is already good to know this ignorance, and precisely 
for the sake of Being, to which the reverence of thinking belongs. Think¬ 
ing is not knowing, but perhaps it is more essential than knowing, 
because it is closer to Being in that closeness which is concealed from 
afar. We do not know the essence of truth. Theretore it is necessary 
for us to ask about it and to be pressed toward this question so as 
to experience the minimal condition that must be fulfilled if we set 
out to dignify the essence of truth with a question. This condition is 
that we take up thinking. 

Our attempted rellection has been accompanied by one insight. It is 
this'- we may think the essence of truth only if we tread upon the most 
extreme edges of beings as a whole. We thereby acknowledge that a 
moment of history is approaching, whose uniqueness is by no means 
determined simply, or at all, on the basis of the current situation of 
the world and of our own history in it. What is at stake is not simply 
the being and non-being of our historical people, nor the being and 
not-being of a "European culture," for in these instances what is at 
stake is only beings. In advance of all that, a primordial decision must 
be made concerning Being and not-being themselves. Being and not- 
being in their essence, in the truth of their essence. How are beings 
supposed to be saved and secured in the free ot their essence, if the 
essence of Being is undecided, unquestioned, and even forgotten? 

Without the truth of Being, beings are never steadfast; without the 
truth of Being and without the Being and essence of truth the very 
decision about the Being and non-being of a being remains without 
the openness of freedom, from which all history begins 

The question returns: what is the essence of truth for us? Our lectures 
were only supposed to refer to the region out of which the word of 
Parmenides speaks. 

The directive within this reference pointed to the destination toward 
which the primordial thinker is under way, namely the home ot the 



§9 Looking of Being into the open 1242-243] 


163 


goddess 'AAqdna. This home also directs the course of the thinker's 
genuine experience The home of the goddess is the first place of arrival 
on the journey of thinking and it is also the point of departure for 
the course of thinking that bears out all relations to beings. The essence 
of this home is wholly determined by the goddess Her dwelling there 
first makes the home the home it is. And in dwelling the "essence" 
of the goddess is fulfilled She is the self-presenting and hence indwell¬ 
ing look of the light into the darkness. ’AAqdna is the disclosedness 
that in itself shelters all emergence and all appearance and disappear¬ 
ance. ’AAqdeia is the essence of the true: the truth lyuth dwells in 
everything that comes to presence; it is the essence of all essence, essen¬ 
tiality [Diese west in allem Wesenden und ist das Wesen alles "Wesens" die 
Wesenheit], 

To experience this is the destiny of the primordial thinker His think¬ 
ing knows in essentiality the essence of truth (not just the essence of 
the true) as the truth of the essence 

As the essence of emergence (<p6oiq), aAqdeia is the beginning itself 
The journey to the home of the goddess is a thinking out toward the 
beginning The thinker thinks the beginning insofar as he thinks d\i']- 
deia. Such recollection is thinking's single thought. This thought, as 
the dictum of the thinker, enters into the word and language of the 
Occident 

This language expresses the essence of history, and history, because 
it is the sending of Being and because Being only comes to light unex¬ 
pectedly, is appropriated always in the unexpectedness of the primordi- 
ality of the beginning The history attuned to the primordial essence 
of the clearing of Being destines beings ever again to the destiny of 
decline in long-enduring concealments. According to this destiny, de¬ 
cline now holds sway, the evening of what emerged primordially. 

The land drawn into its space-time from this history and sheltered 
therein is the Occident [Abend-land, literally, "evening-land") according 
to the primordial (i.e., in terms of the history of Being) meaning of 
this word. 

The language of the Occident expresses the beginning, i e., the still 
concealed essence of the truth of Being. The word of the language of 
the Occident preserves the appurtenance of Occidental humanity to the 
home region of the goddess d,\qi)na. 



ADDENDUM 


[Heidegger prepared the following draft of a recapitulation of pages 77-79 
but did not include it in his lectures —Ed ] 

Modern man has a “lived experience" of the world and thinks the 
world in those terms, i.e., in terms of himself as the being that, as 
ground, lies at the foundation of all explanation and ordering of beings 
as a whole. In the language of metaphysics what lies at the foundation 
is subjectum. Modern man is by essence the "subject." Only because 
he is the "subject" can his I or his Ego become essential. And the fact 
that a Thou is set in opposition to the I, thereby relegating the I to 
its limits and raising the I-Thou relation to prominence, and the fact 
that the place of the individual is then taken by the community, the 
nation, the people, the continent, and the planet, these in no way, meta¬ 
physically speaking, cancel out the subjectivity of modern man, but 
in fact for the first time lead it into its unconditioned state. "Anthropol¬ 
ogy," the Anglo-American form of which is "sociology," is supplanting 
essential thought. Only when man becomes the subject do non-human 
beings become objects. Only within the domain of subjectivity can a 
dispute arise over objectivity, over its validity, its profit and its loss, 
and over its advantages and disadvantages in any particular case. 

Since the essence of man, for the Greeks, is not determined as subject, 
a knowledge of the histoncal beginning of the Occident is difficult and 
unsettling for modern "thought," assuming that modern "lived expen- 
ence" is not simply interpreted back into the Greek world, as if modern 
man enjoyed a relation of personal intimacy with Hellenism for the 
simple reason that he organizes "Olympic games" penodically in the 
main cities of the planet For here only the facade of the borrowed 
word is Greek. This is not in any way meant to be derogatory toward 
the Olympics themselves; it is only censorious of the mistaken opinion 
that they bear any relation to the Greek essence. And we must come 
to know this latter if we wish to learn the quite different essence of 
modern history, i.e., if we wish to experience our own destiny in its 
essential determination. This task, however, is too awesome and too 
serious for thoughtless opinion and chatter to be accorded even the 
slightest consideration. Whoever is receiving these lectures simply for 
what they pretend to be, namely a thoughtful word of attention and 
incipient heedfulness, will also in time learn to set aside the all too 
quickly advancing sentimental lamentations of a thoughtless and garru- 


165 



166 


Addendum 


lous "position taking." Whoever is sitting here merely to snap up mate¬ 
rial for his political or anti-political, religious or anti-religious, scientific 
or anti-scientific sentiments is wrong and is substituting what just hap¬ 
pens to come to his mind on a particular afternoon for what has been 
the task of thinking in the Occident for the last two and a half millermia, 
ever since its historical beginning. To be sure, the stupidity in circulation 
will not, for thoughtful ones, be a reason to abrogate the task of focusing 
on the essential. The empty chatter cannot be stopped. But by the same 
token the consideration of the level of ones who are too lazy to think 
endangers essential thought. 

Our discussions about "the Roman" are being interpreted as stem¬ 
ming from an anti-Christian hostility. Let us leave it for theology to 
decide whether the meditation on the essence of truth we have at¬ 
tempted here could not, taken in context, be more fruitful for the preser¬ 
vation of Christianity than the aberrant desire to construct new "scien¬ 
tifically" founded proofs for the existence of God and for the freedom 
of the will on the basis of modern atomic physics. 

Primordially, the emergent essence of Being disposes and determines 
the mode of the sheltering of the unconcealed as the word. The essence 
of the word disposes and first determines the essence of the humanity 
corresponding to it and thereby relegates this essence into history, i.e., 
into the essential beginning and the transformation of the essence of 
the truth of beings. But nowhere does there exist a humanity that forms 
for itself a view of Being and then sets itself up with that view as if 
Being and the view of it were like the horns that form on an ox, with 
which it then vegetates. Only because Being and the truth of Being 
are essentially beyond all men and humanities, can, and therefore must, 
the "Being" or "non-being" of man be at stake where man as historical 
is determined to the preservation of the truth of Being. A decline is 
never overcome by simply being stopped or reined in or led in progress 
to better times. All progress might be a mere stepping away from—from 
the essential domain of the begirming. Only in view of the begirming 
can a decline be thought and experienced. The decline can only be 
surmounted when the begirming is saved, but then it is already sur¬ 
mounted. And the begirming can only be saved when it is allowed 
to be the begirming it is. The beginning is primordial only when think¬ 
ing is primordial and when man in his essence thinks primordially. 
This does not refer to the impossible task of repeating the first begirming 
in the sense of a renewal of the Greek world and its transformation 
into the here and now. On the contrary, it means to enter, by way 
of primordial thought, into a confrontation and dialogue with the begin¬ 
ning in order to perceive the voice of the disposition and determination 
of the future. This voice is only to be heard where experience is. And 
experience is in essence the suffering in which the essential otherness 



Addendum 


167 


of beings reveals itself in opposition to the tried and usual. The highest 
form of suffering is dying one's death as a sacrifice for the preservation 
of the truth of Being. This sacrifice is the purest experience of the voice 
of Being. What if German humanity is that historical humanity which, 
like the Greek, is called upon to poetize and think, and what if this 
German humanity must first perceive the voice of Being! Then must 
not the sacrifices be as many as the causes immediately eliciting them, 
since the sacrifice has in itself an essence all its own and does not require 
goals and uses! Thus what if the voice of the beginning should an¬ 
nounce itself in our historical destiny? 

But what if the beginning has fallen into oblivion? Would we not 
then need to experience first of all that this oblivion is not mere negli¬ 
gence or dereliction on the part of man but is an event pertaining to 
the very essence of Being itself, i.e, to unconcealedness? 

What if man had not only forgotten the essence of Being but if Being 
itself had forgotten man and had abandoned him to self-forgetfulness? 
Are we speaking of Xqdq here only to appear erudite? 

The Greeks are largely silent over \qdq. At times, however, they do 
speak of it. Hesiod mentions Xqdq together with \qi6q, the absence 
of food, as one of the daughters of the veiling night. Pindar also speaks 
of it and indicates the direction we need to follow in order to glimpse 
its hidden essence. 



EDITOR'S AFTERWORD 


The present volume 54 of Heidegger's Gesamtausgabe comprises the pre¬ 
viously unpublished text of an hourly lecture course the philosopher 
conducted during the winter term 1942—43 at the University of Freiburg. 
The course was called "Parmenides and Heraclitus," but in view of the 
nearly exclusive occupation with Parmenides we have modified the 
title. The book is the eighteenth to appear in this series. 

The editor had at his disposal author's manuscripts amounting to 
eighty-four numbered pages of lectures and thirty-four pages of recapit¬ 
ulations. Heidegger did not prepare a recapitulation for every lecture. 
The author himself indicated the pages where the recapitulations were 
to be inserted, but the choice of the exact place within those pages 
devolved upon the editor. 

The manuscripts are in the folio format, and the writing is crosswise. 
The right halves of the pages contain numerous interpolations, enclosed 
within one another; Heidegger indicated their point of contact with 
the text in each case. 

The "addendum" included herein is the text of a recapitulation refer¬ 
ring to pages 77-79. It was not presented in the lectures and was 
described by Heidegger as a "mere draft." 

The editor also had at his disposal typewritten copies of all the manu- 
senpts mentioned above. They were checked twice against the originals. 
Some passages in the manuscripts, missing in the transenptions, were 
inserted by the author himself at the proper place. Heidegger completely 
reviewed this transcript while he was preparing his lectures on the 
Logos of Heraclitus (cf. Gesamtausgabe, vol. 55). He supplemented the 
transcript on numerous occasions with some smaller and some larger 
interpolations. The editor deciphered these and without exception al¬ 
lowed for them in the present text. 

The division into numbered paragraphs, the subdivisions, and the 
formulation of all the headings are the work of the editor. The latter 
adhere closely to the text of the lectures. In accord with Heidegger's 
wishes, an extensive table of contents precedes the work and this, to¬ 
gether with the segmentation of the text, should make the overall struc¬ 
ture of the lectures clearly visible. 

In connection with the present volume, the reader is also referred 
to Heidegger's essay "Moira (Parmenides Fragment VIII, 34-41)" which 
appeared in his Vortrdge und Aufsatze, first published in 1954. 


169 



170 


Editor's Afterword 


The editor would like to express his sincere thanks for the assistance 
he received in his work from H. Heidegger, from H. Tietjen and W. 
Deyhle, who reviewed the typescript, and from F.-W. von Herrmann, 
who responded to questions concerning the deciphering of the interpo¬ 
lations. Likewise, thanks are due to Francis B. Vawter for technical help. 

Manfred S. Frings 
DePaul University 



